
WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN COLONEL STIMSON was worried. A week earlier, a few days after the atomic bomb had exploded over Hiroshima, he had had a small heart attack. With intimations of mortality, the weary secretary of war, who was nearly 78, had decided to resign. His deepest concern, however, may not have been his health but the future of the atom. The reports of what had happened when an American B-29 bomber dropped the bomb on Hiroshima at 8:15 a.m. on August 6, 1945, had been devastating. Almost everything within a 500-meter radius of the explosion had been incinerated, and buildings as far away as three kilometers had burned. A second bomb had been dropped on Nagasaki on August 10, and the two blasts had killed more than 150,000 people and injured at least another 100,000. Henry Stimson was shaken. He had never opposed using the bomb to end the war and save American lives that would have been lost in an invasion of the Japanese islands. Before Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he had even believed that possession of the bomb would be a master card in the hands of American leaders, which they could use as leverage in settling the great issues of the postwar world. But in the aftermath of the bombing, Stimson changed his mind and, along with Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson, initiated an attempt to place all future atomic weapons under international control. Had their approach been followed, the United States and the Soviet Union might well have reached an agreement that would have checked the spread of nuclear weapons. But their plan, which depended on superpower cooperation, was undone by Cold War politics. A half-century later, with the Cold War over and nuclear weapons still at large, their illfated efforts are worth recalling.

NOT UNTIL August 13, after he had received news that Japan was about to surrender, were Stimson and his wife, Mabel, finally able to get away to the Adirondack Mountains for a rest. Surrounded by old friends in what one of his biographers described as an atmosphere of idealism and high-mindedness, the old warrior concluded that if the United States tried to keep atomic technology secret and then endeavored to use this monopoly to pressure an increasingly truculent Soviet Union to follow domestic and foreign policies that the United States dictated, it was bound to fail. That strategy might even lead to a secret armament race of a rather desperate character, as he later put it. Stimson called on his assistant secretary John McCloy to help him compose a memorandum to President Truman that would articulate his thoughts on what to do with the bomb. During the war, McCloy had personally tried to persuade Truman that the Japanese be informed that we had the bomb and that we would drop the bomb if reasonable terms of surrender were not promptly accepted. The essence of Stimson and McCloys approach was their belief that the United States did not possess real atomic secrets as such -- only the American know-how needed to construct a bomb. Having abandoned any notion of using the bomb to transform Soviet society, Stimson envisioned a covenant between the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union would halt efforts to develop its own atomic weapons, while the United States would make available information on atomic energys peaceful application and would also undertake not to employ the atomic bomb or any development of it as an instrument of warfare. When McCloy came back to Washington and discussed these ideas with Secretary of State James Byrnes, the latter asserted that it would be a long time before [the Soviets] were at the stage where we were now. Looking ahead to the foreign ministers meeting in London scheduled for early September, Byrnes told the assistant secretary of war that the Russians were only sensitive to power and all the world, including the Russians, were cognizant of the power of this bomb, and with it in his hip pocket he felt he was in a far better position to come back with tangible accomplishments even if he did not threaten anyone expressly with it. After hearing Byrnes perspective, McCloy traveled back to St. Huberts Club in the Adirondacks with a heavy heart to complete his work on the presidential memorandum.Returning to Washington on September 3, Stimson went to a cabinet lunch the next day at the White House. Afterward he had a long and distressing talk with Secretary Byrnes. I took up the question I had been working on with McCloy up at St. Huberts, namely how to handle Russia with the big bomb. I found Byrnes was very much against any attempt to cooperate with Stalin. His mind is full of the problems with the coming meeting of the foreign ministers, and he looks to having the presence of the bomb in his pocket, so to speak, as a great weapon to get through the thing. Later that day Stimson had a 15-minute meeting with the president, in which he told Truman that he was unhappy with Byrnes approach, for it guaranteed a return to power politics. Realizing he needed more time to explain his own position, Stimson arranged for a longer meeting on September 12 to discuss his still-unfinished memorandum.Stimson considered a direct approach to Stalin the best way to avoid a devastating arms race. Regardless of how long the Soviets might take to develop their own bomb, it was vital that the United States work to ensure their cooperation in the postwar world. Because of the issues at stake, Stimson insisted that the president and he read the finished memo through together on September 2. The central argument was that American-Soviet relations may be irretrievably embittered by the way in which we approach the solution of the bomb with Russia. For if we fail to approach them now and merely continue to negotiate with them, having this weapon rather ostentatiously on our hip, their suspicions and their distrust of our purposes and motives will increase. In singling out Byrnes cowboy approach, Stimson stressed the difference between that stance and his own.He concluded by urging one-on-one negotiations with the Soviet Union. An offer through the newly formed United Nations or any other international group would not be taken seriously by the Soviets it must be peculiarly the proposal of the United States. As a capstone to his argument, Stimson counseled Truman: The chief lesson I have learned in a long life is that the only way you can make a man trust-worthy is to trust him and the surest way to make him untrustworthy is to distrust him and show him your distrust. Truman agreed with Stimson that we must take Russia into our confidence. But, as events would demonstrate, the presidents position was not hard and fast. Truman then encouraged Stimson to present his views to the cabinet on September 21, 1945, the day Stimson would turn 78 and his last in office.To prepare for the meeting, Stimson sent his memo to Dean Acheson, who, he believed, is evidently strongly on our side on the treatment of Russia. Unlike Truman, who greeted the destruction of Hiroshima with the words, This is the greatest thing in history, Achesons first reaction was horror: The news of the atomic bomb is the most frightening yet. If we cant work out some sort of organization of great powers, we shall be gone geese for fair. After Stimsons retirement, his scheme would be in the hands of Acheson, in many ways his moral successor.At 51 years of age, Dean Gooderham Acheson was approaching the period of his greatest power and performance. Acheson was very much a realist, distrustful of universal plumb-plans and international organizations as substitutes for great power diplomacy. His goal was to bring into balance American morality and power, for he believed that morality, if it is not to be divorced from the practical world of action, must inform itself and relate itself to things as they are. Like Truman, Acheson thought that any problem can be solved with a little ingenuity and without inconvenience to the folks at large.
 
THE DISCUSSION was unworthy of the subject. That was Achesons verdict on the fateful cabinet meeting at which Stimson expounded his thoughts on the atom bomb and the Soviet Union. Before his colleagues, Stimson emphasized the distinction between the disclosure of basic scientific information about atomic power and the technological secret of the bombs design. He proposed sharing the scientific information with the Soviets as a good-faith gesture the technology would eventually be developed in any case. We do not have a secret to give away -- the secret will give itself away, Stimson declared.Cool and elegant in his argumentation, Acheson, present as acting secretary of state with Byrnes in London, strongly supported Stimson. But the discussion soon veered from the central issue of how to approach the Soviets on questions raised by Americas development of the bomb, of whether Stimsons one-on-one strategy was the right one. Instead, the debate, such as it was, centered on the spurious issue of whether or not the United States should give the bomb to the Soviet Union.The fiercest opposition to Stimsons plan came from Secretary of the Navy (and future Secretary of Defense) James Forrestal. A self-made, driven Wall Street investment banker before coming to Washington at the outset of the war, Forrestal was already a hard-line anticommunist. His obsession with the communist menace fed his growing paranoia, eventually leading him to resign as secretary of defense in 949 and not long after to commit suicide by jumping out a window of the Bethesda Naval Hospital. Forrestal viewed the secret of atomic weaponry as the property of the American people and doubted that the Soviets, so essentially Oriental in their thinking, could be trusted. He recorded in his diary that Acheson saw no alternative except to give full information to the Russians, though in the context of gaining some quid pro quo in the way of a mutual exchange of information. Acheson, Forrestal noted, could not conceive of a world in which we were hoarders of military secrets from our Allies, particularly this great Ally upon our cooperation with whom rests the future peace of the world.The meeting was inconclusive, but the president, who nonetheless professed to have found the discussion exhilarating, ordered the participants to submit their opinions to him in writing. Four days later Achesons memorandum arrived at the White House. It was, Acheson admitted, deeply influenced by Colonel Stimsons paper. In calling for the United States to approach the Soviet Union soon and directly, Acheson reiterated Stimsons contention that what we know is not a secret which we can keep to ourselves, for this scientific knowledge . . . relates to a discovery more revolutionary in human society than the invention of the wheel. Moreover, if the invention is developed and used destructively, there will be no victor, and there may be no civilization remaining. He then argued that the joint development of the bomb by the United States, Britain, and Canada must appear to the Soviet Union to be unanswerable evidence of an Anglo-American combination against them. His logic was impeccable: A government as powerful and as power conscious as the Soviet government would feel compelled to act as vigorously as possible to restore the loss of power that the discovery of the bomb had produced. It would most certainly do so if the United States tried to maintain a policy of exclusion. For America to declare itself a trustee of the development for the benefit of the world will mean nothing more to the Russian mind than an outright policy of exclusion.Acheson proposed approaching the Soviets directly, after consulting with the British and explaining the objective to Congress. Otherwise the public and Congress will be unprepared to accept a policy involving substantial disclosure to the Soviet Union. He was especially sensitive to this last point, for the day after the cabinet meeting, the press had been full of reports that Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace had suggested revealing the secret of the bomb to the Soviet Union -- the so-called Wallace plan. Senator Tom Connally of Texas, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, reflected the sentiment prevailing in the Senate when he declared that complete secrecy should be maintained regarding the atomic bomb. It was surely in response to this criticism that Acheson insisted that discussions with the Soviets need not involve at this time any disclosures going substantially beyond those which have already been made to the world.But Truman was pulled in a number of directions. He was increasingly distrustful of the Soviet Union, while at the same time hopeful that negotiations with Moscow on several fronts would bear fruit. But with the growing hostility to the Soviet Union in both Congress and the press, he averred that he would not turn over the plants and equipment needed to make a bomb. On the other hand, he knew that to try to keep the bomb solely in Americas hands might mean the end of the newly born United Nations. In his message to Congress on October 3, Truman followed Achesons reasoning indeed, the opening paragraphs of his speech had been drafted by Achesons assistant, Herbert Marks. The president called for international arrangements looking, if possible, to the renunciation of the use and development of the atomic bomb. Unless the United States pursued this path, a desperate armament race would ensue. Truman affirmed the claim that the theoretical underpinnings of the bomb were already generally known, and he called for discussions, first with Great Britain and Canada and then with other nations. Acheson believed that the road had been kept open for Stimsons approach.Then, at an impromptu press conference at Reelfoot Lake in Tennessee, Truman explained that the American secret lay in the know-how that put the scientific knowledge to work, just the same as know-how in the construction of the B-29. He was not willing to share that know-how with the Soviets: If they catch up with us on that, they will have to do it on their own hook, just as we did. Truman then spoke of his meetings with Stalin at Potsdam and pointed out that misunderstandings there had been cleared up by speaking frankly, a practice on which he prided himself, one could reach agreement with the Soviets. Thus he concurred with Stimson and Acheson that direct talks with the Soviets were necessary, but he was not about to give away the secret of the bomb. This was the real Harry Truman speaking, shooting from the hip. Moreover, he believed he had the right man for the job: Secretary of State James Byrnes.
 
 
BYRNES, HOWEVER, did not favor dealing directly with the Soviet Union. Although Trumans comments had been in response to the Stimson-Acheson proposals, Byrnes did not consult Acheson as he prepared for a November meeting in Washington on this issue with the British and Canadian prime ministers. Instead, he solicited advice from Vannevar Bush, the scientist who had obtained F.D.R.s approval in 1940 to organize and speed the atom bomb research effort. Eager for collaboration with the Soviets, Bush urged a technical approach that was not concerned with questions of political feasibility his final objective was an inspection system that would offer protection against a surprise atomic attack. Both the technical process and the means of setting it up would be entrusted to the United Nations.Byrnes embraced Bushs U.N. approach. It avoided the difficult task of discussing matters with the Soviets on a strictly political level, of trying to find out what they were willing to negotiate, and it allowed the Americans to safeguard their technological expertise until the Soviets proved more cooperative. In Achesons view, however, by bringing the discussion of atomic energy control to a large group of nations that included many small ones of no demonstrated power or responsibility, Byrnes was following a course that was the opposite pole from what he and Stimson had intended.The meeting with British Prime Minister Clement Attlee and his Canadian counterpart, Mackenzie King, only reinforced Byrnes position. In late August 945 Attlee had been convinced that on atomic matters he, Truman, and Stalin should take counsel together. By November, with Britain prepared to develop its own atomic bomb, he decided that we should all lay aside our nationalistic ideas and take the problem of atomic energy to the United Nations. The November conference in Washington made clear that the direct approach to the Soviets would never take place. No one suggested talks -- let alone joint action -- with the Soviet Union.Surprisingly, Acheson got another chance to press forward with his hopes of working with the Soviet Union on atomic energy. Soon after the British and Canadians agreed to take the issue to the United Nations, Byrnes headed to Moscow for a meeting with Stalin, with the reluctant British foreign minister, Ernest Bevin, in tow. Although the conference was supposed to settle differences between the Western allies and the Soviet Union over Eastern Europe, Japan, China, and Iran, Byrnes also wanted to get the Soviets to sponsor a U.N. commission on atomic energy. Far from keeping the bomb out of negotiations with the Soviets, Byrnes reversed his position and placed the atom squarely on the table.The discussion centered on the proposed U.N. Atomic Energy Commission. No one asked any specific questions about the atomic energy policies of the protagonists. The Russians readily acceded to Washingtons proposals, insisting only that the commission be accountable to the Security Council, where both countries wielded veto power. Much to everyones surprise, wrote Harvard University President James Conant, in Moscow as Byrnes scientific adviser, to Vannevar Bush, the Russians didnt argue or talk back.As the conference ended, Byrnes, who tended to view foreign affairs in much the same light as domestic ones, believed he had come back with a good horse trade. (He had once observed that negotiating with the Soviets was just like dealing with the Senate: You build a post office in their state, and theyll build a post office in our state.) It was a singular moment of accommodation in what was fast becoming a grim period of confrontation.
  
BYRNES MAY have been successful in Moscow, but he still faced opposition at home. Not only had he angered Truman by not keeping him fully informed of his dealmaking in Moscow, but he had also irked Senator Arthur Vandenberg, the ranking Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, by not consulting him. Far from seeing the Moscow conference as a further step forward in bettering relations with the Soviet Union, Vandenberg viewed the Byrnes accords as a possible threat to Americas control over the secrets of the atom -- one more American giveaway, as he wrote his wife. Fortunately Acheson suggested a solution, which Vandenberg was able to call his own, demanding that what had been decided on in Moscow be subject to congressional approval.But what exactly did the Americans want? No program had been articulated in Moscow, only the guiding principles of a U.N. commission. The solution, as Byrnes saw it, was to appoint Acheson head of a committee that would formulate American policy. As Acheson tells the story, Byrnes phoned Acheson, who was in bed with the flu, and asked him to chair a group to devise a plan for the international control of atomic energy. Acheson protested, Mr. Secretary, I dont know anything about this. But Byrnes was about to depart for Moscow. He said, My planes going in a few minutes, and I have no time to argue. The President wants it done, and you are appointed. Acheson claimed his fever went up six degrees. The other members of the committee were the scientists James Conant and Vannevar Bush, John McCloy, and General Leslie Groves, a hard-driving executive who had overseen the Manhattan Project.Acheson was well aware of his limited understanding of the scientific aspects of atomic energy. To assist the committee, he appointed a board of consultants that would work out the details of the proposal. Its chairman was David Lilienthal, an energetic, optimistic man who had successfully headed one of the most admired achievements of the New Deal, the Tennessee Valley Authority,. By far the most influential consultant was J. Robert Oppenheimer, the nuclear physicist who had been the director of the Los Alamos laboratory during the war and was now at the University of California at Berkeley.At Los Alamos Oppenheimer had demonstrated a singular gift for organization he had mobilized a great number of scientists to work on the project, ending up with a work force of some 3,000 people. For Acheson, Lilienthal, and McCloy, he became their indispensable teacher. Each evening after dinner he would lecture Acheson and McCloy with the aid of a borrowed blackboard on which, in Achesons telling, he drew little figures representing electrons, neutrons, and protons bombarding one another, chasing one another about, dividing, and generally carrying on in unpredictable ways. Our bewildered questions seemed to distress him. At last he put down the chalk in gentle despair saying, Its hopeless! I really think you two believe neutrons and electrons are little men.Despite his grave reservations about exploring the international control of atomic energy through a U.N. commission rather than directly with the Soviets, Acheson strove to come up with a workable plan. Both he and Lilienthal believed that the facts of atomic energy would translate into public policy. Thus scientists as well as individuals schooled in government or statecraft would be involved in the plans formulation, so that it might be understood by laymen and experts alike. Without the scientific input, Acheson said, it would be as if one called in a very intelligent and well-intentioned South Sea islander and said, There are too many cows being killed on railroad tracks, and I want you to do something about it. But the South Sea islander, although smart and meaning well and wanting to be helpful, has never seen a cow or railroad.On March 17, 1946, the Acheson-Lilienthal report was ready. The key was an Atomic Development Authority that would control the whole field of atomic energy, from mining through manufacturing. Rather than rely on international inspection teams what might be called atomic cops -- the consultants proposed to control potential cheating at the source, the uranium and thorium mines. This solution, developed by Oppenheimer, Acheson termed brilliant and profound. The Acheson-Lilienthal report recognized that with the fundamentals of atomic energy widely known, it was impossible to outlaw atomic weapons. It concluded that so long as intrinsically dangerous activities may be carried out by nations, rivalries are inevitable and that, therefore, a single international authority should become the only legal participant in activities associated with atomic arms.The report was endorsed by all the members of the committee, although Groves may have signed on because he did not believe the Soviets would ever agree to it. Nonetheless, the consultants recommended that the United States abandon its monopoly on the atomic bomb and rest its hopes on cooperative, control of the terrible weapon. Then, the very day Acheson presented the secretary of state with the formal report, Byrnes told him that Truman had asked Bernard Baruch to sell the plan to the rest of the world.
 
BERNARD BARUCH, a self-styled park bench philosopher and self-promoting adviser to presidents, was 75 years old. He had made a fortune speculating on Wall Street and multiplied his admirers in Congress with his lavish hospitality and gifts of money to senatorial and congressional campaigns. Franklin D. Roosevelt had tried to keep him at a distance, but Byrnes and Truman believed that his influence in the Senate would help them pass the necessary legislation. Acheson and Lilienthal were appalled. Acheson futilely tried to dissuade Byrnes. Lilienthal wrote in his diary that when he read of Baruchs appointment, I was quite sick. We need a man who is young, vigorous, not vain, and whom the Russians would feel isnt out simply to put them in a hole, not really caring about international cooperation. Baruch has none of these qualifications.Baruch made it clear he was not about to accept the report as written and present it to the United Nations as he put it, he would not be a messenger boy. Moreover, he would not include any scientists among his advisers. Baruch assured Lilienthal that he could smell his way through. On June 4, 946, at the opening session of the Atomic Energy Commission, held in the Hunter College gymnasium in the Bronx, Baruch set forth his own version of the American plan with the portentous opening words, We are here to make a choice between the quick and the dead. But he made two key changes in the Acheson-Lilienthal report that proved fatal. He insisted that swift and sure penalties greet violations and that punishment not be subject to a Security Council veto. Such conditions, Acheson believed, were a prescription for failure.The now-dubbed Baruch plan was very much a take-it-or-leave-it proposition. America would relinquish its stockpile of atomic bombs, which in June 1946 numbered just three, only after firm guarantees were in place that no other nation could arm itself with these weapons. Since General Groves believed it would take the Soviet Union between 10 and 20 years to develop atomic weapons, the American nuclear monopoly would extend well into the future. (Most scientists believed it would take the Soviets only three to five years, which proved far closer to the reality.) But Groves was right when he assured those sitting near him during the translation of Baruchs speech that the Soviets would never accept these conditions.Nor was it clear what Baruchs immediate and sure punishment meant. In a talk with Truman, Baruch said that punishment meant war. Acheson certainly understood that any effective punishment of a great power did mean war, but he also realized that no country would go to war over such an issue. The whole idea of punishment was an illusion, and he was too much the realist not to detest paper police sanctions, as he called them. Controlling uranium through the international authority was the best way to prevent cheating.Truman, however, endorsed Baruchs no-veto provision, and the plan was effectively dead. Although the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations, Andrei Gromyko, offered a counterproposal and Stalin hinted in September that there might be some way out of the impasse, Baruch was not inclined to negotiate and forced a vote by the end of the year. Unsurprisingly, the U.N. Atomic Energy Commission approved the American plan, with the Soviet Union and Poland abstaining it was then killed by a Soviet veto in the Security Council. Truman later confessed to Acheson that choosing Baruch was the worst mistake I have ever made. Acheson described Baruchs role more succinctly: It was his ball, and he balled it up.
 
HAD SERIOUS negotiation over the control of atomic energy ever been possible? Once Truman agreed to put the issue in the hands of the United Nations rather than approach the Soviets directly, any such plan may well have been doomed. Stimson was probably right when he wrote to Baruch that with that decision, the time had passed for handling the bomb in the way I suggested to the president last summer. However, the Acheson-Lilienthal plan, though limited by the U.N. framework, gave some hope that the atomic problem might have been resolved had the two superpowers shown any true disposition to negotiate.
No evidence demonstrates that Truman really understood the Acheson-Lilienthal report or even read it with care. His policy, as McGeorge Bundy described it in his history of the nuclear age, Danger and Survival, seldom went beyond the counsel he had to choose from. He was not an initiator but a chooser the buck stopped here, but he waited for the buck to arrive. No one, not even Dean Acheson, really pressed him to go further than he did. Byrnes, not Acheson, was his secretary of state just as Byrnes vacillated in his dealings with Moscow between accommodation and hard-line rejection, so did Truman. In early 1946 no Cold War consensus yet dominated the policymaking world.As long as the United States possessed the atomic bomb, Stalin was determined that the Soviet Union would also have it. In August 1945 he told his leading nuclear physicist, Igor Kurchatov, to provide us with atomic weapons in the shortest possible time. You know that Hiroshima has shaken the whole world. The equilibrium has been destroyed. Provide the bomb -- it will remove a great danger from us. But this does not mean that his views could not have been changed. The Stimson-Acheson proposal was designed precisely to avoid perpetuating a threatening monopoly. The two men were doubtless right in September 1945 to press for an early approach to Moscow. Had Roosevelt lived, that might well have occurred. McGeorge Bundy makes the case that Roosevelt would have taken to heart the quest for a workable international agreement and made the matter his own most pressing business. Truman did not.Never far from Roosevelts strategy toward the Russians was his belief that the great powers should order matters to prevent the outbreak of another world war. Eager to avoid the weaknesses of the League of Nations, F.D.R. had toyed early in the war with the idea that the Four Policemen -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, and China -- would share the responsibility for maintaining the postwar peace. This notion became enshrined in the 11-member U.N. Security Council, in which the Big Five (the Four Policemen plus France) retained a permanent veto. Roosevelt saw the great powers acting as a kind of world steering committee overseeing the global balance of power as well as embodying the ideal of collective security.Roosevelt, recognizing that the Soviet Union insisted on being accorded great power status, would doubtless have understood Stalins determination to possess atomic weapons as long as the United States did. In this respect, he might very well have endorsed Stimsons original recommendation. Roosevelt might also have explored the alternative, an agreement to limit the production of atomic bombs to the great powers and to negotiate some specific number of weapons each might possess. This scheme would have represented great power gendarmerie with a vengeance, a very hard sell given the postwar rhetoric of collective security.Acheson himself understood as well as anyone the need to treat the power-conscious Soviet Union as a great power. Washington could not -- and should not -- pursue a policy of atomic exclusion. Had President Truman fully adopted this view and explained to the public that discussions with the Soviets did not imply giving away some secret scientific information, the Stimson-Acheson proposal might have been tried. But in this period the Truman administration had not yet found its footing in foreign affairs, and dealing with the Russians solely on the basis of great power relations, when the ideological struggle between the two powers was intensifying, was becoming ever more difficult.Had the Russians responded to a Stimson-Acheson approach, the history of the Cold War would have been substantially different. Hiroshima would have produced a balance of power rather than a balance of terror. Soviet behavior would likely have been far less confrontational, especially after Stalins death in 1953. A bilateral effort, which Stimson had originally urged, would have formed an even more solid basis for postwar cooperation on a broad range of security issues. In the end, the Acheson-Lilienthal plan was the best that anyone could come up with. Once Truman and Attlee had agreed to turn the problem over to the United Nations, the notion of a U.S.-Soviet atomic partnership was probably destined to fail. Then, despite Achesons best efforts to reopen the path to Moscow, Baruch put up the final barrier.As relations between the United States and the Soviet Union deteriorated, Moscow pressed forward at full throttle with its nuclear weapons program. At dawn on August 29, 1949, four years after America dropped the bomb on Hiroshima, Russia successfully tested its own atom bomb on the steppes of Kazakhstan. Stimsons secret armament race of a rather desperate character had begun.HALF A DECADE after the collapse of the Soviet Union, American policymakers and intellectuals are still seeking new principles on which to base national strategy. The current debate over the future of the international order including predictions of the end of history, a clash of civilizations, a coming anarchy, or a borderless world -- has failed to generate agreement on what shape U.S. policy should take. However, a single overarching framework may be inappropriate for understanding todays disorderly and decentralized world. Americas security no longer hangs on the success or failure of containing communism. The challenges are more diffuse and numerous. As a priority, the United States must manage its delicate relationships with Europe, Japan, Russia, and China, the other major players in world affairs. However, Americas national interest also requires stability in important parts of the developing world. Despite congressional pressure to reduce or eliminate overseas assistance, it is vital that America focus its efforts on a small number of countries whose fate is uncertain and whose future will profoundly affect their surrounding regions. These are the pivotal states.The idea of a pivotal state -- a hot spot that could not only determine the fate of its region but also affect international stability -- has a distinguished pedigree reaching back to the British geographer Sir Halford Mackinder in the 1900s and earlier. The classic example of a pivotal state throughout the nineteenth century was Turkey, the epicenter of the so-called Eastern Question because of Turkeys strategic position, the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire posed a perennial problem for British and Russian policymakers.Twentieth-century American policymakers employed their own version of a pivotal states theory. Statesmen from Eisenhower and Acheson to Nixon and Kissinger continually referred to a country succumbing to communism as a potential rotten apple in a barrel or a falling domino. Although the domino theory was never sufficiently discriminative -- it worsened Americas strategic overextension its core was about supporting pivotal states to prevent their fall to communism and the consequent fall of neighboring states.Because the U.S. obsession with faltering dominoes led to questionable policies from Vietnam to El Salvador, the theory now has a bad reputation. But the idea itself -- that of identifying specific countries as more important than others, for both regional stability and American interests -- is sensible. The United States should adopt a discriminative policy toward the developing world, concentrating its energies on pivotal states rather than spreading its attention and resources over the globe.Indeed, the domino theory may now fit U.S. strategic needs better than it did during the Cold War. The new dominoes, or pivotal states, no longer need assistance against an external threat from a hostile political system rather, the danger is that they will fall prey to internal disorder. A decade ago, when the main threat to American interests in the developing world was the possibility that nations would align with the Soviets, the United States faced a clear-cut enemy. This enemy captured the American imagination in a way that impending disorder does not. Yet chaos and instability may prove a greater and more insidious threat to American interests than communism ever was. With its migratory outflows, increasing conflict due to the breakdown of political structures, and disruptions in trade patterns, chaos undoubtedly affects bordering states. Reacting with interventionist measures only after a crisis in one state threatens an important region is simply too late. Further, Congress and the American public would likely not accept such actions, grave though the consequences might be to U.S. interests. Preventive assistance to pivotal states to reduce the chance of collapse would better serve American interests.A strategy of rigorously discriminate assistance to the developing world would benefit American foreign policy in a number of ways. First, as the worlds richest nation, with vast overseas holdings and the most to lose from global instability, the United States needs a conservative strategy. Like the British Empire in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the interests of the United States lie in the status quo. Such a strategy places the highest importance on relations with the other great powers: decisions about the expansion of NATO or preserving amicable relations with Russia, China, Japan, and the major European powers must remain primary. The United States must also safeguard several special allies, such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, South Korea, and Israel, for strategic and domestic political reasons.Second, a pivotal states policy would help U.S. policymakers deal with what Sir Michael Howard, in another context, nicely described as the heavy and ominous breathing of a parsimonious and pacific electorate. American policymakers, themselves less and less willing to contemplate foreign obligations, are acutely aware that the public is extremely cautious about and even hostile toward overseas engagements. While the American public may not reject all such commitments, it does resist intervention in areas that appear peripheral to U.S. interests. A majority also believes, without knowing the relatively small percentages involved, that foreign aid is a major drain on the federal budget and often wasted through fraud, duplication, and high operating costs. Few U.S. politicians are willing to risk unpopularity by contesting such opinions, and many Republican critics have played to this mood by attacking government policies that imply commitments abroad. Statesmen responsible for outlining U.S. foreign policy might have a better chance of persuading a majority of Congress and the American public that a policy of selective engagement is both necessary and feasible.Finally, a pivotal states strategy might help bridge the conceptual and political divide in the national debate between old and new security issues. The mainstream in policy circles still considers new security issues peripheral conversely, those who focus on migration, overpopulation, or environmental degradation resist the realist emphasis on power and military and political security.In truth, neither the old nor the new approach will suffice. The traditional realist stress on military and political security is simply inadequate -- it does not pay sufficient attention to the new threats to American national interests. The threats to the pivotal states are not communism or aggression but rather overpopulation, migration, environmental degradation, ethnic conflict, and economic instability, all phenomena that traditional security forces find hard to address. The dirty industrialization of the developing world, unchecked population growth and attendant migratory pressures, the rise of powerful drug cartels, the flow of illegal arms, the eruption of ethnic conflict, the flourishing of terrorist groups, the spread of deadly new viruses, and turbulence in emerging markets a laundry list of newer problems must also concern Americans, if only because their spillover effects can hurt U.S. interests.Yet the new interpretation of security, with its emphasis on holistic and global issues, is also inadequate. Those who point to such new threats to international stability often place secondary importance (if that) on U.S. interests indeed, they are usually opposed to invoking the national interest to further their cause. For example, those who criticized the Clinton administration in the summer of 1994 for not becoming more engaged in the Rwandan crisis paid little attention to the relative insignificance of Rwandas stability for American interests. The universal approach common to many advocates of global environmental protection or human rights, commendable in principle, does not discriminate between human rights abuses in Haiti, where proximity and internal instability made intervention possible and even necessary, and similar abuses in Somalia, where the United States had few concrete interests.Furthermore, the new security approach cannot make a compelling case to the American public for an internationalist foreign policy. The public does not sense the danger in environmental and demographic pressures that erode stability over an extended period, even if current policies, or lack thereof, make this erosion inexorable and at some point irreversible. Finally, the global nature of the new security threats makes it tempting to downplay national governments as a means to achieving solutions.A pivotal states strategy, in contrast, would encourage integration of new security issues into a traditional, state-centered framework and lend greater clarity to the making of foreign policy. This integration may make some long-term consequences of the new security threats more tangible and manageable. And it would confirm the importance of working chiefly through state governments to ensure stability while addressing the new security issues that make these states pivotal.
 
ACCORDING TO which criteria should the pivotal states be selected? A large population and an important geographical location are two requirements. Economic potential is also critical, as recognized by the U.S. Commerce Departments recent identification of the big emerging markets that offer the most promise to American business. Physical size is a necessary but not sufficient condition: Zaire comprises an extensive tract, but its fate is not vital to the United States.What really defines a pivotal states is its capacity to affect regional and international stability. A pivotal state is so important regionally that its collapse would spell transboundary mayhem: migration, communal violence, pollution, disease, and so on. A pivotal states steady economic progress and stability, on the other hand, would bolster its regions economic vitality and political soundness and benefit American trade and investment.For the present, the following should be considered pivotal states: Mexico and Brazil Algeria, Egypt, and South Africa Turkey India and Pakistan and Indonesia. These states prospects vary widely. Indias potential for success, for example, is considerably greater than Algerias Egypts potential for chaos is greater than Brazils. But all face a precarious future, and their success or failure will powerfully influence the future of the surrounding areas and affect American interests. This theory of pivotal states must not become a mantra, as the domino theory did, and the list of states could change. But the concept itself can provide a necessary and useful framework for devising American strategy toward the developing world.
 
TO UNDERSTAND this idea in concrete terms, consider the Mexican crisis a year ago. Mexicos modernization has created strains between the central and local governments and difficulties with the unions and the poorest groups in the countryside, and it has damaged the environment. Like the other pivotal states, Mexico is delicately balanced between progress and turmoil.Given the publicity and political debate surrounding the Clinton administrations rescue plan for Mexico, most Americans probably understood that their southern neighbor is special, even if they were disturbed by the means employed to rescue it. A collapse of the peso and the consequent ruin of the Mexican economy would have weakened the U.S. dollar, hurt exports, and caused convulsions throughout Latin Americas Southern Cone Common Market and other emerging markets. Dramatically illustrating the potency of new security threats to the United States, economic devastation in Mexico would have increased the northward flow of illegal immigrants and further strained the United States overstretched educational and social services. Violent social chaos in Mexico could spill over into this country. As many bankers remarked during the peso crisis, Mexicos troubles demonstrated the impossibility of separating there from here.Because of Mexicos proximity and its increasing links with the United States, American policymakers clearly needed to give it special attention. As evidenced by the North American Free Trade Agreement, they have. But other select states also require close American attention.
 
EGYPTS LOCATION has historically made its stability and political alignment critical to both regional development and relationships between the great powers. In recent decades, its proximity to important oil regions and its involvement in the Arab-Israeli peace process, which is important for the prosperity of many industrialized countries, has enhanced its contribution to stability in the Middle East and North Africa. Furthermore, the government of President Muhammad Hosni Mubarak has provided a bulwark against perhaps the most significant long-term threat in the region -- radical Islamic fundamentalism.The collapse of the current Egyptian regime might damage American interests more than the Iranian revolution did. The Arab-Israeli peace process, the key plank of U.S. foreign policy in this region for the past 2o years, would suffer serious, perhaps irreparable, harm. An unstable Egypt would undermine the American diplomatic plan of isolating fundamentalist rogue states in the region and encourage extremist opposition to governments everywhere from Algeria to Turkey. The fall of the Mubarak government could well lead Saudi Arabia to reevaluate its pro-Western stance. Under such conditions, any replay of Operation Desert Storm or similar military intervention in the Middle East on behalf of friendly countries such as Kuwait or Jordan would be extremely difficult, if not impossible. Finally, the effect on oil and financial markets worldwide could be enormous.Egypts future is not only vital, but very uncertain. While some signs point to increasing prosperity and stability -- birth rates have declined, the United States recently forgave $ 7 billion of debt, and Egypts international reserves reached $ 16 billion in 1995 -- the preponderance of evidence paints a dimmer picture. Jealously guarding its power base and wary that further privatization would produce large numbers of resentful former state employees, the government fears losing control over the economy. Growth rates lurch fitfully upward, and although reform has improved most basic economic indicators, it has also widened the gap between rich and poor. Roughly one-third of the population now lives in poverty, up from 20-25 percent in 1990.A harsh crackdown on fundamentalism has reduced the most serious short-term threat to the Mubarak regime, but a long-term solution may prove more elusive. The governments brutal attack on the fundamentalist movement may ultimately fuel Islams cause by alienating the professional middle class such a policy has already greatly strengthened the more moderate Muslim Brotherhood and radicalized the extremist fringe.Environmental and population problems are grow,ng. Despite the gradually decreasing birthrate, the population is increasing by about one million every nine months, straining the countrys natural resources, and is forecast to reach about 94 million by 2025.Recognizing Egypts significance and fragility, successive U.S. administrations have made special provisions to maintain its stability. In 1995 Egypt received $ 2.4 billion from the U.S. government, making it the second-largest recipient of American assistance, after Israel. That allocation is primarily the result of the Camp David accords and confirms Egypts continuing importance in U.S. Middle East policy. Current attempts by American isolationists to cut these funds should be strongly resisted. On the other hand, the U.S. government and Congress should seriously consider redirecting American aid. F-16 fighters can do little to help Egypt handle its internal difficulties, but assistance to improve infrastructure, education, and the social fabric would ease the countrys troubles.
 
WHILE EGYPTS prospects for stability are tenuous, Indonesias future appears brighten By exercising considerable control over the population and the economy for the last several decades, Indonesias authoritarian regime has engineered dramatic economic growth, now expected to be about 7 percent annually for the rest of the decade. Poverty rates have dropped drastically, and a solid middle class has emerged. At first glance, Indonesias development has been a startling success. However, the government now confronts strains generated by its own efforts.Along with incomes, education levels, and health status, Indonesias population is increasing dramatically. With the fourth-largest population in the world and an extra three million people added each year, the country is projected to reach 260 million inhabitants by 2025. The main island of Java, one of the most densely populated places on earth, can scarcely accommodate the new bodies. In response, the government is forcing many citizens to migrate to other islands. This resettlement program is the focal point for a host of other tensions concerning human rights and the treatment of minorities. The governments brutal handling of the separatist movement in East Timor continues to hinder its efforts to gain international respect. President Suhartos regime has made a point of cooperating with Chinese entrepreneurs to boost economic expansion, but ethnic differences remain entrenched. Finally, the governments favoring of specific businesses has produced deep-rooted corruption.Because of the governments tight control, it can maintain stability even while pursuing these questionable approaches to handling its people. However, as a more sophisticated middle class emerges, Indonesians are less wRling to accept the existing concentration of economic and political power. These opposing forces, one for continued central control and one for more dispersed political power, will clash when Suharto leaves office, probably after the 1998 elections.A reasonable scenario for Indonesia would be the election of a government that shares power more broadly, with greater respect for human rights and press freedoms. The new regime would maintain Indonesias openness to foreign trade and investment, and it would end favoritism toward certain companies. Better educated, better paid, and urbanized for a generation, Indonesians would have fewer children per family. Indonesia would continue its leadership role in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC), helping foster regional growth and stability.The possibility remains, however, that the transfer of power in Jakarta could trigger political and economic instability, as it did in x965 at the end of President Sukarnos rule. A new regime might find it more difficult to overawe the people while privately profiting from the economy. Elements of the electorate could lash out in frustration. Riots would then jeopardize Indonesias growth and regional leadership, and by that stage the United States could do nothing more than attempt to rescue its citizens from the chaos.Instability in Indonesia would affect peace and prosperity across Southeast Asia. Its archipelago stretches across key shipping lanes, its oil and other businesses attract Japanese and U.S. investment, and its stable economic condictions and open trade policies set an example for ASEAN, APEC, and the region as a whole. If Indonesia, as Southeast Asias fulcrum, falls into chaos, it is hard to envisage the region prospering. It is equally hard to imagine general distress if Indonesia booms economically and maintains political stability.Despite the difficulty, the United States must have a strategy for encouraging Indonesias stability. Part of this will involve close cooperation with Japan, which is by far the largest donor to Indonesian development. A more sensitive aspect of the strategy will be encouraging the regime to respect human rights and ethnic differences. The strategy also calls for calibrated pressure on Indonesia to decrease its widespread corruption, which in any case is required to achieve the countrys full integration into the international business world.
 
BRAZIL BORDERS every country in South America except Ecuador and Chile, and its physical size, complex society, and huge population of 155 million people are more than enough to qualify it as a pivotal state.Brazils economy appears to be recovering from its 1980s crisis, although the indicators for the future are inconsistent. President Fernando Henrique Cardosos proposals for economic reform, which include deregulation and increased openness to foreign investment in key industries, have advanced in Brazils congress. Many basic social and economic indexes point to a generally improving quality of life, including the highest industrial growth since the 1970s (6.4 percent in x994), declining birth and death rates, increasing life expectancy, and an expanding urban infrastructure. In the longer term, however, Brazil must address extreme economic inequality, poor educational standards, and extensive malnutrition. These realities, together with a burgeoning current account deficit and post-peso crisis skittishness, help diminish investor confidence.Were Brazil to founder, the consequences from both an environmental and an economic point of view would be grave. The Amazon basin contains the largest tropical rain forest in the world, boasting unequaled biodiversity. Apart from aesthetic regrets about its destruction, the practical consequences are serious. The array of plants and trees in the Amazon is an important source of natural pharmaceuticals deforestation may also spread diseases as the natural hosts of viruses and bacteria are displaced to other regions.A social and political collapse would directly affect significant U.S. economic interests and American investors. Brazils fate is inextricably linked to that of the entire South American region, a region that before its debt and inflation crises in the 1970s bought large amounts of U.S. goods and is now potentially the fastest-growing market for American business over the decades to come. In sum, were Brazil to succeed in stabilizing over the long term, reducing the massive gap between its rich and poor, further opening its markets, and privatizing often inefficient state-run industries, it could be a powerful engine for the regional economy and a stimulus to U.S. prosperity. Were it to fail, Americans would feel the consequences.
 
SOUTH AFRICA
 
APARTHEIDS END makes South Africas transition particularly dramatic. So far, President Nelson Mandelas reconciliation government has set an inspiring example of respect for ethnic differences, good governance, and prudent nurturing of the countrys economic potential. In contrast to other conflicts, in which different groups have treated each other with so much acrimony that they could not negotiate, the administration has successfully overcome some of its political divisions: it includes both former apartheid president Frederik Willem de Klerk and Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi. Moreover, South Africa is blessed with a strong infrastructure, a sound currency, and vast natural resources. These assets make its economy larger and more vital than any other on the continent, accounting for a colossal 75 percent of the southern African regions economic output. No longer an international pariah, it is working to develop robust trade and financial links around the region and the globe. A hub for these connections, South Africa could stimulate growth throughout the southern cone of Africa.
There are indications, however, that South Africa could succumb to political instability, ethnic strife, and economic stagnation. Power-sharing at the cabinet level belies deep ethnic divisions. Any one of several fissures could collapse this collaboration, plunging the country into civilwar. Afrikaner militias may grow increasingly intransigent, traditional tribal leaders could raise arms against their diminished influence, and when Mandela no longer leads the African National Congress, the party may abandon its commitment to ethnic reconciliation.
As Mandelas government struggles to improve black living standards and soothe ethnic tensions, the legacy of apartheid creates a peculiar dilemma. It will be hard to meet understandable black expectations of equity in wages, education, and health, given the countrys budget deficits and unstable tax base. As racial inequalities persist, blacks are likely to grow impatient. Yet if whites feel they are paying a disproportionate share for improved services for blacks, they might flee the country, taking with them the prospects for increased foreign direct investment.
While the primary threats to South Africas stability are internal, its effectiveness in containing them will have repercussions beyond its borders. Even before apartheid ended, South Africa had enormous influence over the regions political and economic development, from supporting insurgencies throughout the front-line states to providing mining jobs for migrant workers from those same countries. If South Africa achieves the economic and political potential within its grasp, it will be a wellspring of regional political stability and economic growth. If it prospers, it can demonstrate to other ethnically tortured regions a path to stability through democratization, reconciliation, and steadily increasing living standards. Alternatively, if it fails to handle its many challenges, it will suck its neighbors into a whirlpool of self-defeating conflict.
Although controlling the sea-lanes around the Cape of Good Hope would be important, especially if widespread trouble were to erupt in the Middle East, American strategic interests are not otherwise endangered in southern Africa. Yet because South Africa is the United States largest trading partner in Africa and possesses vast economic potential, its fate would affect American trading and financial interests that have invested there. It would also destabilize key commodity prices, especially in the gold, diamond, and ore markets. More generally, instability in South Africa, as in Brazil and Indonesia, would cast a large shadow over confidence in emerging markets.
American policy toward South Africa should reflect its importance as a pivotal state. While recognizing South Africas desire to solve its problems without external interference, the United States should promote South Africas economic and political stability. Of $ 10.5 billion in American economic aid given in 1995, a mere one percent ($ 135 million) was for South Africa. A strategy that acknowledges this nations importance to American interests would surely be less parsimonious.
 
ALGERIA AND TURKEY
 
ALGERIAS geographical position makes its political future of great concern to American allies in Europe, especially France and Spain. A civil war and the replacement of the present regime by extremists would affect the security of the Mediterranean sea-lanes, international oil and gas markets, and, as in the case of Egypt, the struggle between moderate and radical elements in the Islamic world. All the familiar pressures of rapid population growth and drift to the coastal cities, environmental damage, increasing dependence on food imports, and extremely high youth unemployment are evident. Levels of violence remain high as Algerian government forces struggle to crush the Islamist guerrilla movement.
While a moderate Islamist government might prove less disturbing than the West fears, a bloody civil war or the accession of a radical, anti-Western regime would be very serious. Spain, Italy, and France depend heavily on Algerian oil and gas and would sorely miss their investments, and the resulting turbulence in the energy markets would certainly affect American consumers. The flood of middle-class, secular Algerians attempting to escape the bloodshed and enter France or other parts of southern Europe would further test immigration policies of the European Union (EU). The effects on Algerias neighbors, Morocco and Tunisia, would be even more severe and encourage radical Islamic elements everywhere. Could Egypt survive if Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and Muammar al-Qddafis Libya collaborated to achieve fundamentalist goals? Rumors of an Algerian atomic bomb are probably premature, but the collapse of the existing regime would undoubtedly reduce security in the entire western Mediterranean. All the more reason for the United States to buttress the efforts of the International Monetary Fund and for the Europeans to improve Algerias well-being and encourage a political settlement.
Although Turkey is not as politically or economically fragile as Algeria, its strategic importance may be even greater. At a multifold crossroads between East and West, North and South, Christendom and Islam, Turkey has the potential to influence countries thousands of miles from the Bosporus. The southeast keystone of NATO during the Cold War and an early (if repeatedly postponed) applicant to enlarged EU membership, Turkey enjoys solid economic growth and middle-class prosperity. However, it also shows many of the difficulties that worry other pivotal states: population and environmental pressures, severe ethnic minority challenges, and the revival of radical Islamic fundamentalism, all of which test the countrys young democratic institutions and assumptions. There are also a slew of external problems, ranging from bitter rivalries with Greece over Cyprus, various nearby islands territorial boundaries, and Macedonia, to the developing quarrel with Syria and Iraq over control of the Euphrates water supply, to delicate relationships with the Muslim-dominated states of Central Asia. A prosperous, democratic, tolerant Turkey is a beacon for the entire region a Turkey engulfed by civil wars and racial and religious hatreds, or nursing ambitions to interfere abroad, would hurt American interests in innumerable ways and concern everyone from pro-NATO strategists to friends of Israel.
 
INDIA AND PAKISTAN
 
CONSIDERED separately, the challenges facing the two great states of South Asia are daunting enough. Each confronts a population surge that is forecast to take Pakistans total (23 million in 1990) to 276 million by 2025, and Indias (853 million in 1990) to a staggering 1.45 billion, thus equaling Chinas projected population. While such growth taxes rural environments by causing the farming of marginal lands, deforestation, and depletion of water resources, the urban population explosion is even more worrisome. With 46 percent of Pakistans and 35 percent of Indias population under 15 years old, according to 1990 census figures, tens of millions of young people enter the job market each year the inadequate opportunities for them further strain the social fabric. All this forms an ominous backdrop to rising tensions, as militant Hindus and Muslims, together a full fifth of the population, challenge Indias democratic traditions, and Islamic forces stoke nationalist passions across Pakistan.
The shared borders and deep-rooted rivalry of India and Pakistan place these pivotal states in a more precarious position than, for example, Brazil or South Africa. With three wars between them since each gained independence, each continues to arm against the other and quarrel fiercely over Kashmir, Pakistans potential nuclear capabilities and missile programs, and other issues. This jostling fuels their mutual ethnic-cum-religious fears and could produce another bloody conflict that neither government could control. What effect a full-scale war would have on the Pakistan-China entente is hard to predict, but the impact of such a contest would likely spread from Kashmir into Afghanistan and farther afield, and Pakistan could find support in the Muslim world. For many reasons, and perhaps especially the nuclear weapons stakes, the United States has a vital interest in encouraging South Asias internal stability and external peace.
Could this short list of important states in the developing and emerging-markets regions of the globe include others? Possibly. This selection of pivotal states is not carved in stone, and new candidates could emerge over the next decades. Having an exact list is less important than initiating a debate over why, from the standpoint of U.S. national interests, some states in the developing world are more important than others.
 
BETTER WISE THAN WIDE
 
THE UNITED STATES needs a policy toward the developing world that does not spread American energies, attention, and resources too thinly across the globe, but rejects isolationist calls to write it off. This is a realistic policy, both strategically and politically. Strategically, it would permit the United States, as the country that can make the greatest contribution to world security, to focus on supporting pivotal states. Politically, given the jaundiced view of Americans and their representatives toward overseas engagements, a strategy of discrimination is the strongest argument against an even greater withdrawal from the developing world than is now threatened.
As the above case studies suggest, each pivotal state grapples with an intricate set ofinterrelated problems. In such an environment, the United States has few clear-cut ways to help pivotal states succeed. Therefore, it must develop a subtle, comprehensive strategy, encompassing all aspects of American interaction with each one. Those strategies should include appropriate focusing of U.S. Agency for International Development assistance, promoting trade and investment, strengthening relationships with the countrys leaders, bolstering country-specific intelligence capabilities and foreign service expertise, and coordinating the actions of government agencies that can influence foreign policy. In short, the United States must use all the resources at its disposal to buttress the stability of key states around the globe, working to prevent calamity rather than react to it. Apart from avoiding a great-power war, nothing in foreign policy could be more important.
This focus on the pivotal states inevitably means that developing states not deemed pivotal would receive diminished attention, energy, and resources. This will seem unfair to many, since each of the pivotal states examined above enjoys a higher per capita GDP than extremely poor nations like Mali and Ethiopia. Ideally, U.S. assistance to the entire developing world would significantly increase, but that will not happen soon. A pragmatic refocusing of American aid is better than nothing at all being given to the developing world, which may happen if the isolationist mood intensifies.
Such a refocusing could improve the American publics confidence that its money can be used effectlvely abroad. Relative to what other states give for development, the American contribution is declining. By continuing to spread those resources across a broad swath of developing countries, the United States might further diminish the impact of its assistance in many countries. In contrast, concentrating on a few pivotal states would increase American influence in them and improve the chances of convincing the public to spend resources overseas.
Current patterns of assistance to developing and emerging countries do not reflect American global security interests and in many cases seem glaringly inconsistent with U.S. strategic priorities. While conceding that by far the largest amounts of American aid will go to Israel and Egypt, is it not curious that India, like South Africa, receives less than one percent of total U.S. assistance? Pakistan receives virtually nothing. Algeria receives nothing. Brazil is given one-fifth of the aid awarded to Boliv1a. Turkey gets less than Ethiopia (although, like Egypt, Ankara is given a large amount of military assistance that is hard to explain in the post-Cold War environment). Surely this requires serious examination?
In changing these patterns, diplomatic and political objections will be inevitable. Questions will arise about countries not on the list, particularly when one of them faces a crisis. Some will plead that exceptions be made for states that have been encouraged to undertake internal political changes, like Haiti, El Salvador, and the Philippines. Foreign service professionals will caution against making this strategy part of the declared policy of the United States, for that could indicate likely American reactions in a crisis. The more critics raise these problems, the more controversial this idea will become.
However, the pivotal states strategy merits such a debate, and it is high time for such a policy discussion to begin. As Mackinder pointed out, democracies find it difficult to think strategically in times of peace. All the above-mentioned problems and reservations, far from weakening the case for helping pivotal states, point to the importance of identifying how better to order U.S. policies in different parts of the world. A debate over pivotal states would also provide a way of checking the extent to which American agencies already carry out a discriminative strategy and the degree to which they recognize that the traditional types of external threats are not the only sources of danger to countries important to U.S. interests.
Would this formula solve all of Americas foreign policy challenges? By no means. Priority should always be given to managing relations with the other great powers. In view of the international convulsions of the past o years, who would be rash enough to predict American relations with Russia, Japan, and China a decade or more hence and the dire implications if they go badly? Yet even if those countries remain our primary concern, the developing world still needs a place in U.S. global strategy. By identifying pivotal states to Congress and the public and providing the greatest possible support to those countries, this strategy has a greater chance of coherence and predictability than vague and indiscriminate assurances of good will to all developing countries, large and small. Americas concern about traditional security threats would then be joined by a heightened awareness of the newer, nonmilitary dangers to important countries in the developing world and the serious repercussions of their collapse. Whichever administration steers the United States into the next century, American priorities would be ordered, and its foreign policy toward the developing world would have a focus that of supporting those pivotal states whose future affects the fate of much of the planet.
UZBEKISTAN AT THE CENTER
 
CENTRAL ASIA, scene of the Great Game between England and Russia in the nineteenth century, is once more a key to the security of all Eurasia. Since the fifteenth century the region has mainly been politically organized from without from the 1870s Russia controlled most of its vast territory. The collapse of the Soviet Union four years ago left five new states and placed the areas fate in question. Whether stability comes, and how., will affect Eurasia as a whole, and particularly Russia in its transition to democracy.
Central Asia -- Afghanistan and the five former Soviet republics of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstart, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan -- is strategic despite its seeming remoteness. It borders China, Russia, Iran, and Pakistan and the four major cultural zones they represent Islam is a significant force without and within. The region possesses some of the worlds largest deposits of oil, natural gas, gold, and uranium. The site of the bloodlest war of the past generation, between Afghan rebels and Soviet troops, the region is now rolled by civil wars in Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Huge stores of conventional weapons in several of the countries pose problems. The area also produces or acts as a conduit for much of the heroin reaching Europe. For these reasons alone Central Asia cannot be ignored.
There are three possibilities for the region. It could come under the hegemony of one or more: outside powers, Russia being the most likely candidate. It could lapse into chaos -- Tajikistan and Afghanistan already have threatening the security of adjoining regions. Or it could achieve equilibrium and coherence from within, through the emergence of an anchor state or states.
The growth of one or more strong centers would fill a political vacuum in Central Asia, eliminating what has long been the main rationale for foreign encroachment and so helping protect Russias fragile democracy from the potentially fatal temptation of expansionism. Most important, a Central.Asian stabilizer would quickly become the third leg of a tripod of power in the former Soviet Union, alongside Russia and Ukraine. This could create a healthy balance that would best serve the interests of regional security, Europe, and NATO.
Among the Central Asian nations, only Uzbekistan appears to have the potential to be such a stabilizer. But for Westerners, Uzbekistan is an unfamiliar country in an unfamiliar region, and so far it has been relegated to the periphery of U.S. policy.
 
WHY NO OTHER STATE WILL SERVE
 
SEVEN decades of Soviet rule and central planning deformed the politics and economies of the Central Asian states, each in a different way. Four years after independence the countries of the region are still struggling to find and follow their distinct paths to the overall development that each acknowledges is necessary.
Kazakhstan gained great short-term diplomatic benefit from agreeing to relinquish the nuclear weapons left on its soil after the Soviet breakup. It will be a country to reckon with because of its enormous oil reserves. Adroit leadership by President Nursultan Nazarbayev and a body of legislation favorable to business have made it even more attractive than Russia for foreign investors.
Yet Kazakhstans prospects are severely constrained by the ethnic and territorial division of the country between Russians and Kazakhs, the weakness of local institutions, the absence of a scientific intelligentsia, and underdeveloped industry. Its chief city, Almaty, is ill suited to be a major capital because of its limited room for expansion and its location at the edge of the countrys Kazakh-populated zone. A plummeting GDP in 1994 and Nazarbayevs 1995 proroguing of parliament and resort to reform by decree suggest that Kazakhstan will not play a major regional role as an independent force anytime soon. Apparently recognizing this, Nazarbayev agreed in January 1995 to allow several Russian military bases on his countrys soil.
As for Kyrgyzstan, despite President Askar Akayevs aspirations for it to become the Switzerland of Central Asia and his ready access to President Clintohs White House, this small, mountainous nation lacks most of the requirements for a regional power. It is poor in resources its public life is fiddled with interclan rivalries, regional divisions, and corruption and with Russians constituting 20 percent of the population, it faces ethnic tensions that could eventually threaten its survival.
Turkmenistan has already done so well from the sale of natural gas that the government supplies electricity at no charge to everyone in this otherwise poor country. But with a large desert territory, a population of fewer than four million, and a minuscule intellectual elite, Turkmenistan will depend on others for security, much like the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait.
Tajikistan has felt the full impact along its southern border of the war and large-scale drug trafficking in neighboring Afghanistan. Its own resulting civil war and ethnic strife have been exacerbated by grave divisions among Tajikistans leaders, a paucity of natural resources, and a populace awash in Soviet weaponry. As for Afghanistan, a generation of brutal warfare has not only left a large portion of the country in ruins but has destroyed most of the attributes of statehood, inviting interference from neighbors.
This assessment may undervalue the strengths of these countries, but there is little reason to believe that any of the five could resist outside pressures or even mobilize the political and economic resources to resist chaos within, should it erupt. That leaves Uzbekistan as the sole candidate for regional anchor.
 
UZBEKISTANS ASSETS
 
ALTHOUGH smaller than Kazakhstan, which has vast tracts of uninhabited desert, Uzbekistan is nine-tenths the size of France. It has a population of about 23 million Afghanistan and Kazakhstan are next in Central Asia, at about 8 million each. In addition, there are politically active Uzbek minorities in all the other countries of the region, including the x.5 million ethnic Uzbeks in Afghanistan. Ethnic Russians, by contrast, represent less than a tenth of Uzbekistans population and are concentrated in the capital, Tashkent. Uzbekistan lies at the geographic center of Central Asia. While it borders all the regions other states, it alone has no common border with any major power.
Uzbekistans ancient urban centers of Samarkand, Bukhara, Khiva, and Tashkent have constituted the historical and cultural core of the region since the fifteenth century. The Mongol conqueror Timur, or Tamerlane (c. 1336-1405), born near Samarkand, brought the entire Middle East under his sway and lavished the proceeds on the city, his capital. The Uzbeks of today differ ethnically from the medieval Timurids, but the Timurids are irrevocably linked with the nation, making Uzbeks feel they share a tradition of statehood that, though interrupted, has no parallel in the region. This also shapes Uzbek attitudes toward surrounding powers. When, after the Turkic-speaking states of Central Asia declared their independence in 1990-91, Turkey briefly aspired to act as their elder brother, Uzbeks dismissed it as an upstart. Had Timur not defeated the Ottoman sultan Bayazid in 1402 and, incidentally, saved Europe in the process?
Both the czars and the Soviet regime confirmed Uzbekistans place in inner Asia. The Russians named Tashkent their regional military and administrative headquarters after taking control of it in 1865, and the city was still the seat of Russias military presence in Central Asia when the U.S.S.R. began disintegrating in 99o. Although this Soviet republic housed no nuclear weapons, its military bases boasted some 40,000 Red Army tanks, now rusting in equipment graveyards around the country.
Soviet rule also developed Uzbekistans economy, endowing it with major factories for the production of aircraft, buses, and tractors as well as refineries for oil piped in from neighboring Turkmenistan. The Soviets set up a network of research institutes and scholarly publications in Tashkent, confirming the citys status as a regional capital of scientific and intellectual life.
Undergirding these political, economic, and intellectual assets is a solid base of natural resources. Uzbekistan lacks Kazakhstans overwhelming oil reserves or Turkmenistans vast gas deposits but is rich in both fuels nonetheless. Gold, tungsten, and manganese are abundant, while Uzbekistans uranium deposits are essential to Russias nuclear industry. And the cotton monoculture, though built on colonial exploitation by Moscow, enabled Uzbekistan to become one of the worlds leading producers of that important export commodity.
 
THE LIABILITIES COLUMN
 
SUCH ADVANTAGES give substance to Uzbekistans prospects, but they are offset by drawbacks that could derail all hopes for the future. As is often true, many of the liabilities are the obverse of the countrys strengths.
The cotton monoculture with its ubiquitous irrigation system led directly to the Aral Seas loss of 6o percent of its volume since 1960 -- one of the worlds worst ecological disasters -- and the resulting fouled water and windblown salt created serious public health problems. The emphasis on cotton also rendered Uzbekistan dependent on food grown elsewhere. The Kremlin treated Tashkent as a showcase city but tied its communications and transportation all the more closely to Moscow, the single hub of the Soviet empire. If Uzbekistans central location is an asset, its engineered borders are not, since they correspond to neither natural nor ethnic boundaries. Perhaps because Uzbekistans homegrown communist leaders were masters at keeping Moscow out of their hair, they were at first reluctant to seize and capitalize on independence. Since the old regime did not collapse, leaders did not have to start from scratch after independence, but this means that many Soviet-era personnel remain in place and that some of the most negative Soviet institutions, notably the National Security Service (formerly the IGB), are intact.
Western critics have accused Uzbekistans leaders of being unregenerate communists. This is not the case, for even during the Soviet period those in power in Uzbekistan were far more concerned with balancing the powerful regional and clan interests in the republic than with applying the precepts of Marx or Lenin. Yet they are not democrats either. Indeed, democracy is so remote a concept that the Uzbek name for its parliament, Oliy Majlis, was imported -- from the Arabic. The regional factions and family-based networks that continue to dominate the countrys political life have a dangerous dislike of compromise and desire to best all rivals. With Moscow no longer imposing order, the president manages the diverse interests with difficulty, if at all. Most citizens are leery of one man-one vote democracy, since it could upset a balance of powerful social forces that is already far less stable than in the past.
Among the nations of Central Asia, few of these liabilities are unique to Uzbekistan regional loyalties and clan structures, for instance, are equally powerful in Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, and could as readily lead to unrest. But if Uzbekistan successfully addresses these challenges, the countrys assets will leave it uniquely positioned to anchor the security of the region.
 
KARIMOVS EQUATION
 
SOME WESTERN observers question whether Uzbekistans government is up to the task. The country is still ruled by the former first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan, they argue. They cite the slow progress of privatization and the chilling list of human rights abuses documented by Human Rights Watch and other international organizations: unlawful searches, denial of due process, political arrests, and interference with the press.
It is true that President Islam Karimov rose to power under communist rule (though in the era of perestroika) and that his government has proceeded slowly with privatization and at times demonstrated scant regard for human rights. Repression has undeniably occurred, and the constitution contains several questionable clauses, including one guaranteeing free Uzbekistan may be speech only within limits prescribed by law. But the authorities tend to speak apologetically of earlier human rights violations as temporary responses to extreme circumstances rather than a practice that will endure. The larger story is that the Karimov government is acting in accordance with an overall strategy of change. To be sure, it has in mind conservative reform that avoids what Karimov calls pseudorevolutionary leaps -- but reform nonetheless.
The strategy rests on three pillars. Foremost is the establishment and protection of Uzbekistans sovereignty. Beyond that, the government wants to assure political stability while steadily broadening participation and the rule of law. It also aims to foster step-by-step privatization and the growth of free markets in a manner that supports rather than undermines social well-being.
The first objective, promotion of sovereignty, has called for fast footwork. When Uzbekistan reluctantly declared its independence on August 3, 1991, there was ample cause for anxiety. Soon thereafter, the wars in Afghanistan and Tajikistan and its need to strengthen its security to the south forced Uzbekistan to enter into an uneasy military alliance with Russia, even though it feared Russias ultranationalists might try to exploit the arrangement to gain a permanent foothold in the region. While Uzbeldstans leaders collaborated militarily with Russian President Boris Yeltsin on Tajikistan, they expressed grave reservations about Russias June 1994 draft mutual security pact for Commonwealth of Independent States countries, which remains unratified. They also opposed Russias proposals on dual citizenship, which would have transformed Uzbekistans ethnic Russians into a kind of fifth column for Moscow. And although Uzbekistan is a CIS member, its government has vocally criticized Russias most recent push -- after Yeltsin sent troops to the secessionist republic of Chechnya in December 1994 -- to centralize the CIS around Moscow and turn what is ostensibly an economic association of former Soviet republics into a political and military alliance.
Having secured independence, the government focused on transforming the military into an Uzbek institution. Working with local remnants of the Soviet Army, it set about de-Russifying the force, so that the officer corps, 85 percent Russian at independence, is now 65 percent Uzbek.
Noting the threat to Ukraines sovereignty arising from that nations dependence on foreign oil, Karimov made energy independence a priority. Laying more than 600 miles of pipeline a year, drastically cutting consumption, and successfully seeking Western investment, Uzbekistan expects to be self-sufficient within two years. A parallel program in agriculture has shifted tens of thousands of acres of marginal land out of cotton and into wheat, reducing food imports and beginning to address the ecological effects of the Aral Sea disaster.
The Karimov government has aggressively pursued transportation and communications development programs to lessen reliance on Russia. German construction companies are building a web of roads suited to the needs of an independent state, while the national airline and its new fleet of Airbuses have transformed Tashkent into a hub with direct links to European, North American, and Asian cities. Meanwhile, Frances Alcatel and other foreign firms have broken the Russian monopoly in telecommunications.
Uzbekistans sovereignty and stability have also been threatened from within, by territorial clans and other special interests, including religion, that leave the government wielding far less power than it might appear. Uzbek leaders have seen territorial and clan conflict rip Afghanistan and Tajikistan apart and Islamic forces almost swamp the secular regime in Algeria. When, in an early move, the Karimov regime canceled an election, it sparked a campaign of attacks by Islamic militants. Karimov resolved to use the power of the old system to trim the excesses of the new and to set clear parameters for the fledgling countrys politics. Determined that Uzbekistan would be a secular state, he banned all religious parties and excluded radical reformers and extreme nationalists from the political scene.
The president thus refused to recognize the Islamic Renaissance Party and drove from office the mufti of Tashkent, Mukhammad Yusuf Sadyk, who then departed the country. Last March Karimov postponed the presidential election to 2000, reasoning that holding it this year as scheduled would provoke a clash of territorial and clan loyaltes that might destroy the young state. Much criticized in the West for this, Karimov points out that Presidents Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and Akayev of Kyrgyzstan, both considered warm friends of democracy, have since taken similar measures. As part of the same strategy of trimming the political extremes, the Karimov government refused to register Birlik (Unity), a party pushing to form a counterparliament of the sort that existed briefly in Soviet Estonia, and Erk (Liberty), a party of intellectuals accused of championing extreme nationalism.
Although these measures conflict with democratic ideals, they serve as the basis for civic accord, at least for the time being. But recognizing that the peace is fragile, the government has begun an intricate dance, permitting the establishment of political parties within the new parameters. Recently it has allowed independent television and radio stations to take root both in Tashkent and in provincial centers. It has also extended recognition to the politically moderate Sunni branch of Islam that predominates in the country financed citizens pilgrimages to Mecca and effected a rapprochement with other Islamic countries.
To counter the divisive forces in the society, the government has mounted campaigns to strengthen national identity. It established Uzbek as the official tongue, forcing the president and senior members of the government to study the language (all official business in the Soviet era was conducted in Russian). It plans to abandon the Cyrillic script for the Roman alphabet soon. Dozens of rich but long-ignored legal, scientific, and philosophical texts from Uzbekistans medieval period are being published. New educational institutions are preparing citizens to participate fully in international life, teaching them English principally but also German and Russian, while the thousands of young people sent abroad to study are expected to help guide their homelands development.
Are these steps leading to a more thoroughgoing authoritarianism, or will they, as the government claims, prepare the way for the expansion of participatory government? Karimov points to the growing self-confidence of his people, which, he suggested recently, is enabling them to move beyond the childhood disease of extreme nationalism. Nationalism has made possible the considerable power of presidents in many of the countries carved from the U.S.S.R., Russia included. But Uzbekistan has laws, not significantly different from ones in presidential republics like France, that define the presidents powers, nor are these mere empty words. And while the countrys four new legal parties could prove as docile as those in communist Poland, for now their leaders speak eloquently of their independence.
Despite flirtations with Middle Eastern and Asian models of authoritarianism, Karimov and his team profess to be convinced that in the long run democracy will be essential to the maintenance of social accord. But like conservative reformers everywhere, they insist that democratic participation will proceed only from the prudent instincts associated with the ownership of property. Economic reform, therefore, is essential to their cautious program of nation-building.
 
THERAPY WITHOUT TEARS
 
KARIMOVS INITIAL moves to reform the economy targeted Uzbekistans colonial heritage. The president for the first time allowed natural gas from Bukhara to be used for local needs rather than being piped to Russia. In January 1992 he dismantled Moscows price controls and privatized most retail stores. To date, 54,000 private businesses have been registered. Although there are as yet few start-up firms, some, like Efim Bank in Urgut, have brought their entrepreneurs great wealth and visibility.
Influenced by former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachevs preaching about a law-based society, Karimov has insisted on the creation of a legal framework for a market economy before large state firms are privatized. The Institute of Philosophy and Law in Tashkent is finishing a major drafting project on property rights, and with the help of German jurists is completing a new civil code and laws on trade.
Notwithstanding the delays, Karimov is committed to privatization. For one thing, he believes it is necessary to prevent the kind of corruption prevalent in Russia and to some extent in Uzbekistan. Corruption exists, he says, so long as state property exists. Given his moderate instincts, he will probably maintain state control of a few industries deemed essential to national security, but this should leave as much as 70 percent of nonagricultural GDP in private hands.
Karimovs penchant for conservative reform is most evident in agriculture, because of the nationwide irrigation network. The president expects the state to maintain control of water resources and hence the cotton industry. Since the collective farms established in the Soviet period are largely controlled by families and clans, Karimov favors their transformation into cooperatives rather than full-blown privatization, which he fears would trigger conflict. Forty percent of farmland has already been turned over to private owners, but there is as yet no free market in land and no possibility of mortgaging land holdings. The government hopes that improving living standards in the countryside will empower co-op members to set up independent enterprises.
A striking feature of Uzbekistans economy is the stability of its currency, the sum, introduced in July 1994. Pushed out of the ruble zone by Russia the year before, Uzbekistan was one of the last former Soviet republics to create its own currency. But its tax collection system was intact and the government was strong enough to hold the budget deficit last year to 3.5 percent of GDP. Along with the governments decision to bank gold in the West, this fiscal discipline reduced inflation to x.8 percent a month by last fall, making the country far more attractive to investors from Asia and Europe.
To be sure, the central bank is still poorly organized, and a plan for its reform is still in preparation at Arthur Andersen & Co., the accounting firm. Nevertheless, the World Bank has offered $ 160 million in financing and the Paris Club has pledged $ 900 million in credit, which has attracted attention abroad and brought to Tashkent a parade of heads of state from India, Germany, Israel, Pakistan, and Indonesia.
For now, Russia is still the largest foreign presence in Uzbekistans economy. Thousands of Russian specialists who left after independence have been brought back to industries under term contracts. But the expansion of trade and investment from elsewhere is expected to diminish Russias economic voice.
After the fall of the U.S.S.R., it was widely assumed that Turkey would become a major player in the economies of Uzbekistan and other Central Asian countries. But Turkeys own economic hardships, along with what many Uzbeks consider the Turks condescending attitude, have severely limited Turkeys role.
South Korea, Japan, and Germany are moving aggressively to establish themselves. The South Korean companies Daiwoo and Samsung have set up factories in Uzbekistan, and Japans Toyota and Mitsubishi are doing so, either alone or in collaboration with local firms. Thanks to the 200,000 Koreans whom Stalin settled in the country after World War II, South Korea enjoys an advantage over Japan. Daimler-Benz will produce trucks near Nukus, and several German construction and telecommunications firms are well entrenched.
The sprawling Chkalov Aircraft works offer a window on economic reform in Uzbekistan. After nearly collapsing in the wake of the Soviet breakup, the state-owned facility restored links with most of its former suppliers and now has a contract with Rolls-Royce for engines for a new craft designed for the short-haul market of western China and Central Asia. If and when the government privatizes the concern, it will be selling a valuable asset and will not have to resort to bargain-basement pricing.
 
ISLAND OF STABILITY?
 
IT WOULD be premature to judge Karimovs strategy of conservative change a success or failure. With its clan-based social structure, its fears of Islamic fundamentalism, and civil wars in two neighboring countries, Uzbekistan is constrained by very different concerns than those guiding policy in Moscow, let alone the Baltic states or Central Europe. But it appears that Tashkent has managed to secure the countrys sovereignty and establish the civil accord the government deems essential for development. Overall patterns of foreign investment suggest that economic reform is on a good course.
The United States has been slow to recognize Uzbekistans significance. U.S. investment has been modest, with the exception of projects mounted by Newmont Mining, the M. W. Kellogg Co., and a few others. An initial enthusiasm for Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan brought Vice President Al Gore to both those countries, leaving Karimov to receive an unwelcome lecture on. human rights from a State Department officer. But in an apparent shift, Secretary of Defense William Perry visited Tashkent last March and praised Uzbekistan as an island of stability in Central Asia. Uzbekistan responded by becoming the only Central Asian state to back the trade embargo against Iran the U.S. proposed last spring, aimed in part at the sale of Russian nuclear reactors.
The Perry visit hints at a change of course in Central Asia, which has up to now been an afterthought in European security. The United States had focused on NATO expansion, arms reduction, and a special relationship with Russia based on a drawdown of weapons and Moscows commitment to democratization and economic transformation. In the past year Washington has acknowledged that an independent, peaceful, democratic, and economically developed Ukraine could further those goals. The same reasoning should now be applied to Central Asia, and Uzbekistan in particular. A sovereign Uzbekistan, politically and economically reformed, is the best hope to anchor a potentially unstable region and foster Russias development as anormal country free from regional insecurities and imperial longings.
In no way does this imply that Uzbekistan would become the head of some new Central Asian union embracing the four Turkic-speaking states, if not Tajikistan. Such an arrangement would rightly be opposed throughout the region, and the other countries have already evinced anxiety over Tashkents rising political and economic valence. But a strong Uzbekistan that respects its neighbors sovereignty can foster cooperation in this vast region of geographically open borders, strengthening its neighbors security and prospects for development. The contending parties in Tajikistan, for example, have asked Karimov to mediate in their civil war,. suggesting the possible benefits in the security sphere. The Central Asian Customs Union established in February 1994, and Uzbekistans participation in the economic as opposed to the military and political dimensions of the ClS, are examples of what might be achieved in the economic realm.
As Central Asia gets on its feet, the cxs can emerge as an informal body for economic coordination among countries with a common heritage of Soviet rule rather than as a neo-imperial system enshrining Russias sphere of military and political influence in an unstable region. Such an arrangement, in which a sovereign and strong Uzbekistan would play a significant role, best serves the interests of all countries involved, Russia included.
In June 1994, the Latin American Program at the Council on Foreign Relations, in conjunction with Foreign Affairs magazine, held the unprecedented conference, Latin America: The Next Generation. The conference brought together young leaders in various fields from across the Americas to discuss some of the key issues and dilemmas facing the region. Duriing the conference, it was repeatedly stressed by participants that that role of education is a critical element in the reform element in the reform process in Latin America. Basic literacy rates are still low in many of the countries in the region, and even those with hiigher rates of litereacy are often plagued by wide educational gaps based on gender and class. While most policymakers are quick to say that educational system. Indeed, many may not even know where to begin.
In an effort to highlight the need for examining and improving the educational systems throughout the Americans and to move educational goals up on the agenda of policymakers, as well as to encourage more systematic, nuanced, and informed thinking in this area, the Latin American Program of the Council on Foreign Relations has undertaken a study group entitled, Reforming Education in Latin America: The Second Wave of Reform. Chaired by Ms. Cassandra Pyle, former Executive Director at the Council for International Exchange of Scholars, and directed by Dr. Allison L. C. de Cerreno, Program Associate in the Latin American Program, the study group consists of four sessions, spanning a four month period, which bring together a small group of educators, policymakers, economists, and business people to discuss various issues related to educational reform in the Americas.
To encourage wider participants in this discussion, a world wide web site has been established in cooperation with Foreign Affairsthrough which the papers presented at the sessions can be accessed and ideas can be shared. Please check our conferences web site at http://foreignaffairs.org. 
Pressure to eliminate the budget deficit has grown increasingly intense, and the United States has responded by slashing its spending on foreign relations. The international affairs budget has fallen 5 percent in real terms since 1984, and the Clinton administrations 1997 request is lower than the current budget. The decline is even more striking since bigticket items, such as aid to Israel and Egypt, have been left untouched. And Congress has denied the administration even these modest amounts, forcing the president to veto the State Department authorization bill in April.
Ideally, Congress would reverse this disturbing trend and allocate more funds to the struggling agencies with international responsibilities. The United States would then be able to keep its consulates and embassies open, pay its overdue bill to the United Nations, and fund the trade promotion agencies that support the 300,000 American jobs tied to exports. Perhaps it could even raise slightly the one-tenth of one percent of GDP devoted to foreign aid, a sum that makes the United States the most miserly of the industrialized countries. But presidential candidates Dole and Clinton are not calling for such increases, nor would Congress respond favorably if they did.
The alternative is to make a virtue out of necessity and restructure the agencies that carry out U.S. foreign policy. Underlying the current system is the false premise that the United States objectives abroad -- promoting national security, free trade and U.S. exports, and respect for human rights -- often conflict with one another. In fact, those interests are intertwined. Progress toward democratic government fosters open markets, and American involvement in regional security encourages democracy and free trade. But the current structure of the U.S. foreign policy bureaucracy invites foreign countries, both allies and adversaries, to play agencies or issues against each other. A consolidated structure would buy the United States more effective diplomacy for the buck, satisfying the budget hawks in Congress. More important, it would take advantage of the synergies of the United States various foreign policy aims, compensating for the funding cuts that have crippled the countrys ability to promote its interests abroad. There is no time to lose. As Congress swings the budget ax and imposes solutions, the State Department, U.S. foreign policy, and all Americans suffer.
 
BALKANS ON THE POTOMAC
 
Reinventing diplomacy should begin with the lead U.S. foreign affairs agency, the Department of State. Its chief problem is Balkanization at the upper levels, and a critical initial step is a radical reduction in the number of assistant secretaries. Previous attempts to redress the departments flaws, most recently the 1995 Strategic Management Initiative, have been narrowly conceived and cosmetic in effect. The State Department cannot regain its leading role in American foreign policy by merely reducing its operating expenses or closing overseas posts. It needs an ambitious overhaul.
The State Department currently has 19 assistant secretaries divided by region, such as the Near East, and function, such as human rights, each with a supporting bureau. There are too many assistant secretaries and their views are too divergent for the secretary of state to meet with them as a group, except on rare occasions. They report to the five under secretaries responsible for political affairs economics, business, and agricultural affairs arms control and international security affairs management and global affairs. Policy coordination does not normally take place at the under secretary level either when assistant secretaries appeal to their immediate superiors, disputes are often perpetuated rather than settled. Above the under secretaries are the secretary and deputy secretary, who could bring some order to the process by focusing on these internal conflicts. But like most of their predecessors, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott have rightfully been too preoccupied with the outside world to keep the peace in Foggy Bottom.
The first step toward significant reform is to trim the number of assistant secretaries, leaving those responsible for the regions and specialized support services such as intelligence and security. The task of policy integration should be returned to the regional assistant secretaries, who deal with functional issues such as trade policy, human rights, and the environment on a daily basis. Personnel now in bureaus with purely functional mandates should be folded into regional bureaus, reversing the process by which they have swelled and added country specialists and geographic subdivisions of their own. Thirty years ago, the State Department was organized along these lines, and it worked better than today.
Getting rid of the superfluous assistant secretaries will be a challenge. Congress expressly created many of these positions, and these assistant secretaries have strong political constituencies. Most have titles that resonate with the general public -- democracy, human rights, and labor diplomatic security oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs. They have counterparts in other cabinet departments and congressional committees with whom they have formed tight bonds. No doubt, some will misinterpret these vital efforts as an attack on these issues that are often of global concern. But whereas todays structure presents the United States various aims abroad as competing alternatives, this reform would, by stressing the links between these objectives, make it possible for the United States to promote them more effectively.
 
A WELL-CRAFTED MERGER
 
This first step within the State Department would pave the way for a more controversial move: its merger with the U.S. Information Agency, the Agency for International Development, and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The resulting new Department of Foreign Affairs would improve the coordination of U.S. foreign policy while allowing those obsessed with expenditures on international affairs to declare victory.
Over the strong protests of the Clinton administration, congressional Republicans, led by Senator Jesse Helms (R-N.C.), called for such a move last year. In March Congress passed an ill-crafted compromise that would have given the administration the choice of eliminating one of these three agencies through a merger with State, while allowing the remaining two to operate independently with greatly reduced funding. The administration objected to this suggested bargain, and Clinton vetoed the State Department authorization bill in April. Some critics of Helms proposal argued that State was rife with management problems and could not absorb several other agencies and their functions. Indeed, the Helms plan at once went too far and not far enough. The critics were correct in charging that it grafted new fiefdoms onto a flawed structure and promised to compound the problems of an organization that had grown beyond the control of the secretary and his deputy. However, reversing the sequence -- creating a simplified State Department before bringing in other agencies -- would make a merger possible.
As the smallest and most redundant, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency would be the easiest to accommodate. The under secretary for arms control and international security affairs would take on the ACD directors role, and the agencys staff would be split among support organizations and policy groups. Arms control experts are still very much in need, but, with the end of the Cold War, a separate agency is no longer justified.
The U.S. Information Agency is a considerably larger entity, and it supplies the secretary of state with much-needed advice on public diplomacy. It is already well integrated into U.S. diplomatic missions abroad and thus can easily be brought into the Department of Foreign Affairs by expanding the responsibilities of the under secretary for global affairs. The USIAS Washington-based staff should not form an independent agency within the department they should be assigned to regional bureaus and support functions.
Because it administers large grant programs that Congress closely supervises, the Agency for International Development must preserve some independence from the department, although this distinction will become less important as AID budgets decline and only a handful of major country programs survive. AID integration should follow the precedent set by the Alliance for Progress, the ambitious Kennedy administration assistance program for Latin America. Policy planning should take place at the assistant secretary level, and aid policy groups should work directly with the country desks. Technical support on issues such as energy and the environment would be provided by a unit attached to the under secretary for global affairs. A separate audit unit, based in the United States rather than abroad to keep overseas staff lean and costs down, would provide oversight. In the field, all but the very largest programs -- those that dispense assistance to Israel and Egypt -- would be handled by staff fully integrated into the local American embassy. The U.S. experience in Eastern Europe shows that such streamlined operations can function more fiexibly and cheaply than traditional missions, which routinely require two or more years to set up new programs. Congress would have to abandon its predilection for micromanagement and encourage the organization to simplify its intricate regulations, which give the modest U.S. assistance program extremely high overhead costs.
 
GIVING TRADE ITS DUE
 
Most previous plans for consolidation have not treated trade as central to U.S. foreign policy. But in todays highly competitive economic environment, export promotion and free trade rank among the United States top priorities, and American ambassadors now spend more time on assisting U.S. businesses than on any other single function. These efforts are beginning to pay off: competing countries are increasingly worried about losing market share to the United States, and they have started to complain bitterly about U.S. tactics, annoyed that the United States is finally employing the same methods they have long exploited.
U.S. trade policy suffers from a lack of communication among the many Washington-based agencies that set and implement it. Trade negotiations are housed in the White House in the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, while the Department of Commerce and a constellation of more than a dozen other agencies, large and small, handle export promotion. The trade representative, brandishing the stick of tariffs, develops a negotiating strategy with dissatisfied domestic constituencies in mind and often springs plans on other U.S. agencies and ambassadors overseas without careful discussion of their ramifications. The result, as in the case of U.S. trade relations with China, is a tendency to rely on bilateral sanctions as the approach of first resort. Rather than develop a coalition of like-minded countries or turn to multilateral agencies like the World Trade Organization to advance its aims, the United States issues threats, but the offending partner usually ignores them, recognizing that they are empty because they would harm American companies that benefit from the status quo. In Japan, China, and Indonesia over the past two years, confrontational tactics have produced few gains, but they have damaged U.S. credibility and contributed to heightened tension.
Contradictory U.S. policies, confusing to foreign governments, have their origins in a fragmented bureaucratic structure. The solution lies in merging the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative with the Commerce Departments International Trade Administration and other trade promotion agencies into a freestanding International Trade Agency with a seat on the National Security Council and representation in all relevant interagency groups. This agency would bring together the yin and yang of U.S. trade interests, using multilateral forums as well as bilateral negotiations to open markets and ensuring that trade policy is effective and rhetorically resonant. The United States should not relinquish the possibility of unilateral action, but it must adapt to the more competitive trade environment and strengthen the World Trade Organization by relying on its dispute-settlement procedures. A negotiating strategy that mobilizes incentives as well as sanctions and reflects the wide range of U.S. interests will open more markets than controversial tactics attuned to short-term domestic considerations.
 
BOTTOMS UP
 
Harsh budget cuts have already incapacitated many of the United States diplomatic posts and severely damaged the morale of Americans and foreigners who serve at U.S. embassies and consulates. To make ends meet in tropical Indonesia, for example, the embassy had to cut the only large discretionary item in its budget: air conditioning. Its staffing cuts bore no relation to U.S. interests. While Washington agencies bickered, the embassy could not augment its commercial staff to take advantage of opportunities for expanding exports, nor could it cut excess support staff and reallocate the funds. The result was a mission poorly equipped to further new priorities, such as promoting American business.
This disparity between needs and resources is likely to grow over the next few years, as the attempt to balance the budget drives down spending on international affairs still further. Top-down consolidation in Washington would save money and make the agencies more effective. At the same time, U.S. posts abroad need to be restructured from the bottom up. In 1993 the Pentagon conducted its BottomUp Review, which is a model of downsizing to meet post-Cold War requirements. By consulting local commanders and urging them to submit recommendations, rather than dictating new budget targets to agency heads and major commands and ordering them to spread the cuts at their discretion among their subordinates, the Defense Department speedily adopted a force structure better suited to todays needs at a significantly lower cost.
In theory, chiefs of mission have the authority to shape their staffs in response to changing needs and budgets, but in reality, they lack the power to restructure across agency lines. Washington maintains a tight grip on the reins of reform. One ambassador reported that a few days after he took the requirement to propose cuts to his State staff seriously and offered up five positions, his local CIA chief ruefully confessed that Washington had raised his personnel ceiling by five. In Indonesia, a proposal to reorganize export promotion on an interagency basis won the approval of all agencies local representatives. The USIA was prepared to convert its separate library outside the embassy complex into a one-stop resource for U.S. business that would house the local representatives of several relevant agencies. Each was to lend its expertise to the joint operation, and the plan was strongly supported by the U.S. business community and got off to a good start during Clintons 1994 visit to Jakarta. But this local initiative collapsed amid haggling in Washington over how to divide the costs and floor space, and in the end the cooperative model was scrapped.
The State Department must recognize that although policymakers in Washington should articulate overall strategy, a cookie-cutter solution to unique local problems is doomed to fail. A bottom-up restructuring of overseas personnel would require a specific mandate from the president to his personal representatives, ambassadors, and mission chiefs around the world to reorganize their staffs, and that mandate would expressly apply to all agencies represented at the post, not just the State Department staff. Mission chiefs would also have to be given budget ceilings for operating expenses, including personnel costs, that reflect the importance of their host country to U.S. interests. The successful chief of mission would break down interagency walls, build teams that shift according to changing circumstances, and create a lean, results-oriented organization.
At present, the U.S. foreign affairs bureaucracy is not prepared for a bottom-up approach. Senior officials have fallen into the habit of referring to embassies and consulates as platforms where representatives from Washington can land, refuel, have a meeting or two, and then continue on their way. Officials based in the United States then bear the main burden of relations with foreign countries. This skewed approach relegates overseas posts to mere diplomatic pit stops and encourages mission chiefs to maintain administrative support personnel and fire substantive experts. Budget cuts have not required such a shift, but, combined with this attitude prevalent among policymakers, they will ultimately eviscerate the United States ability to defend its interests and project its influence abroad.
 
A MISSION TO SAVE ALL MISSIONS
 
The lack of consensus about the purpose of the U.S. presence overseas has paralyzed reform efforts. The dominant view is that foreign service officers are hunter-gatherers of information. When asked as part of the Strategic Management Initiative to identify the most valuable service performed by overseas personnel, many members of the Washington policy community selected analysis. This struck a chord with those who remember how George Kennans 1946 long telegram from Moscow shaped U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union for decades. But Kennan wrote his magnum opus as a result of growing frustration with Washingtons policy and its apparent disregard for the reports from the embassy in Moscow. That his primer on Soviet foreign policy resonated with the policy community was largely coincidence. Today facsimile machines, e-mail, telephones, and backchannel telegrams provide a seamless web of communications between Washington and the field, most of it mercifully out of sight of the ambassador and the senior officials at home. If anything, the problem is a suffocating deluge of analysis.
If not analysis, what? Americas representatives abroad should focus on advocacy -- promoting Americas exports, explaining its policies, protecting its citizens, urging democracy, human rights, and open markets, and fostering security arrangements that ensure peace and Americas prosperity. Reporting on these issues is important, but doing something about them should be the new organizing principle for Americas overseas missions. U.S. defense attaches and ca personnel can contribute more by encouraging their counterparts in other countries to adopt new security or human rights policies than by reporting the latest news from the trenches. Economic analysts and aid staff can contribute to export promotion if they are permitted to escape their restrictive bureaucratic boxes. Only if they work together and share information and access can USIA, AID, and State personnel foster democracy.
Overseas missions should be charged with weaving into a coherent whole the various threads of U.S. foreign policy. Foreigners are frequently puzzled by the different messages they hear from highlevel visitors from Washington. One week, the trade representative threatens sanctions over protection of intellectual property. Then an assistant secretary of state warns that Congress will revoke trade privileges if human rights are not respected. A congressional delegation follows, accentuating the positive aspects of the relationship, remaining silent on the actions its members so vigorously proscribe at home. Commerce officials come next, emphasizing how much the United States values the trading relationship and predicting that increased trade will lead to an open society and market reforms.
The United States does not have the luxury of reorganizing piecemeal. Mergers that simply graft agencies onto States existing structure set a bad precedent. And once Washington heedlessly downsizes or shuts overseas posts, reviving them will be impossible. The forthcoming U.S. elections provide an opportunity to seize the reform initiative. Regardless of the victor in November, there will be new faces in the cabinet and new opportunities for restructuring. The United States cannot overcome the challenges of the next century with an outmoded State Department and an obsolete mission.
THE TEPID CONSENSUS
 
IN FOREIGN policy, conservatives are adrift. They disdain the Wilsonian multilateralism of the Clinton administration they are tempted by, but so far have resisted, the neoisolationism of Patrick Buchanan for now, they lean uncertainly on some version of the conservative realism of Henry Kissinger and his disciples. Thus, in this years election campaign, they speak vaguely of replacing Clintons vacillation with a steady, adult foreign policy under Robert Dole. But Clinton has not vacillated that much recently, and Dole was reduced a few weeks ago to asserting, in what was heralded as a major address, that there really are differences in foreign policy between him and the president, appearances to the contrary notwithstanding. But the fault is not Doles in truth, there has been little attempt to set forth the outlines of a conservative view of the world and Americas proper role in it.
Is such an attempt necessary, or even possible? For the past few years, Americans, from the foreign policy big-thinker to the man on the street, have assumed it is not. Rather, this is supposed to be a time for unshouldering the vast responsibilities the United States acquired at the end of the Second World War and for concentrating its energies at home. The collapse of the Soviet Empire has made possible a return to normalcy in American foreign and defense policy, allowing the adoption of a more limited definition of the national interest, with a commensurate reduction in overseas involvement and defense spending.
Republicans and conservatives at first tended to be wary of this new post-Cold War consensus. But they joined it rapidly after 1992, in the wake of the defeat of the quintessential foreign policy president by a candidate who promised to focus like a laser on the domestic economy. Now conservatives tailor their foreign and defense policies to fit the presumed new political reality: an American public that is indifferent, if not hostile, to foreign policy and commitments abroad, more interested in balancing the budget than in leading the world, and more intent on cashing in the peace dividend than on spending to deter and fight future wars. Most conservatives have chosen to acquiesce in rather than challenge this public mood.
In a way, the current situation is reminiscent of the mid-1970s. But Ronald Reagan mounted a bold challenge to the tepid consensus of that era -- a consensus that favored accommodation to and coexistence with the Soviet Union, accepted the inevitability of Americas declining power, and considered any change in the status quo either too frightening or too expensive. Proposing a controversial vision of ideological and strategic victory over the forces of international communism, Reagan called for an end to complacency in the face of the Soviet threat, large increases in defense spending, resistance to communist advances in the Third World, and greater moral clarity and purpose in U.S. foreign policy. He championed American exceptionalism when it was deeply unfashionable. Perhaps most significant, he refused to accept the limits on American power imposed by the domestic political realities that others assumed were fixed.
Many smart people regarded Reagan with scorn or alarm. Liberal Democrats still reeling from the Vietnam War were, of course, appalled by his zealotry. So were many of Reagans fellow Republicans, especially the Kissingerian realists then dominant in foreign affairs. Reagan declared war on his own party, took on Gerald Ford for the 1976 Republican presidential nomination (primarily over issues of foreign policy), and trained his guns on Kissinger, whose stewardship of U.S. foreign policy, he charged, had coincided precisely with the loss of U.S. military supremacy. Although Reagan lost the battle to unseat Ford, he won the fight at the Republican convention for a platform plank on morality in foreign policy. Ultimately, he succeeded in transforming the Republican party, the conservative movement in America, and, after his election to the presidency in 1980, the country and the world.
 
BENEVOLENT HEGEMONY
 
TWENTY YEARS later, it is time once again to challenge an indifferent America and a confused American conservatism. Todays lukewarm consensus about Americas reduced role in a post-Cold War world is wrong. Conservatives should not accede to it it is bad for the country and, incidentally, bad for conservatism. Conservatives will not be able to govern America over the long term if they fail to offer a more elevated vision of Americas international role.
What should that role be? Benevolent global hegemony. Having defeated the evil empire, the United States enjoys strategic and ideological predominance. The first objective of U.S. foreign policy should be to preserve and enhance that predominance by strengthening Americas security, supporting its friends, advancing its interests, and standing up for its principles around the world.
The aspiration to benevolent hegemony might strike some as either hubristic or morally suspect. But a hegemon is nothing more or less than a leader with preponderant influence and authority over all others in its domain. That is Americas position in the world today. The leaders of Russia and China understand this. At their April summit meeting, Boris Yeltsin and Jiang Zemin joined in denouncing hegemonism in the post-Cold War world. They meant this as a complaint about the United States. It should be taken as a compliment and a guide to action.
Consider the events of just the past six months, a period that few observers would consider remarkable for its drama on the world stage. In East Asia, the carrier task forces of the U.S. Seventh Fleet helped deter Chinese aggression against democratic Taiwan, and the 35,000 American troops stationed in South Korea helped deter a possible invasion by the rulers in Pyongyang. In Europe, the United States sent 20,000 ground troops to implement a peace agreement in the former Yugoslavia, maintained 100,000 in Western Europe as a symbolic commitment to European stability and security, and intervened diplomatically to prevent the escalation of a conflict between Greece and Turkey. In the Middle East, the United States maintained the deployment of thousands of soldiers and a strong naval presence in the Persian Gulf region to deter possible aggression by Saddam Husseins Iraq or the Islamic fundamentalist regime in Iran, and it mediated in the conflict between Israel and Syria in Lebanon. In the Western Hemisphere, the United States completed the withdrawal of 15,000 soldiers after restoring a semblance of democratic government in Haiti and, almost without public notice, prevented a military coup in Paraguay. In Africa, a U.S. expeditionary force rescued Americans and others trapped in the Liberian civil conflict.
These were just the most visible American actions of the past six months, and just those of a military or diplomatic nature. During the same period, the United States made a thousand decisions in international economic forums, both as a government and as an amalgam of large corporations and individual entrepreneurs, that shaped the lives and fortunes of billions around the globe. America influenced both the external and internal behavior of other countries through the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Through the United Nations, it maintained sanctions on rogue states such as Libya, Iran, and Iraq. Through aid programs, the United States tried to shore up friendly democratic regimes in developing nations. The enormous web of the global economic system, with the United States at the center, combined with the pervasive influence of American ideas and culture, allowed Americans to wield influence in many other ways of which they were were entirely unconscious. The simple truth of this era was stated last year by a Serb leader trying to explain Slobodan Milosevics decision to finally seek rapprochement with Washington. As a pragmatist, the Serbian politician said, Milosevic knows that all satellites of the United States are in a better position than those that are not satellites.
And Americas allies are in a better position than those who are not its allies. Most of the worlds major powers welcome U.S. global involvement and prefer Americas benevolent hegemony to the alternatives. Instead of having to compete for dominant global influence with many other powers, therefore, the United States finds both the Europeans and the Japanese -- after the United States, the two most powerful forces in the world supportive of its world leadership role. Those who anticipated the dissolution of these alliances once the common threat of the Soviet Union disappeared have been proved wrong. The principal concern of Americas allies these days is not that it will be too dominant but that it will withdraw.
Somehow most Americans have failed to notice that they have never had it so good. They have never lived in a world more conducive to their fundamental interests in a liberal international order, the spread of freedom and democratic governance, an international economic system of free-market capitalism and free trade, and the security of Americans not only to live within their own borders but to travel and do business safely and without encumbrance almost anywhere in the world. Americans have taken these remarkable benefits of the post-Cold War era for granted, partly because it has all seemed so easy. Despite misguided warnings of imperial overstretch, the United States has so far exercised its hegemony without any noticeable strain, and it has done so despite the fact that Americans appear to be in a more insular mood than at any time since before the Second World War. The events of the last six months have excited no particular interest among Americans and, indeed, seem to have been regarded with the same routine indifference as breathing and eating.
And that is the problem. The most difficult thing to preserve is that which does not appear to need preserving. The dominant strategic and ideological position the United States now enjoys is the product of foreign policies and defense strategies that are no longer being pursued. Americans have come to take the fruits of their hegemonic power for granted. During the Cold War, the strategies of deterrence and containment worked so well in checking the ambitions of Americas adversaries that many American liberals denied that our adversaries had ambitions or even, for that matter, that America had adversaries. Today the lack of a visible threat to U.S. vital interests or to world peace has tempted Americans to absentmindedly dismantle the material and spiritual foundations on which their national well-being has been based. They do not notice that potential challengers are deterred before even contemplating confrontation by their overwhelming power and influence.
The ubiquitous post-Cold War question -- where is the threat? -- is thus misconceived. In a world in which peace and American security depend on American power and the will to use it, the main threat the United States faces now and in the future is its own weakness. American hegemony is the only reliable defense against a breakdown of peace and international order. The appropriate goal of American foreign policy, therefore, is to preserve that hegemony as far into the future as possible. To achieve this goal, the United States needs a neo-Reaganite foreign policy of military supremacy and moral confidence.
 
THREE IMPERATIVES
 
SETTING FORTH the broad outlines of such a foreign policy is more important for the moment than deciding the best way to handle all the individual issues that have preoccupied U.S. policymakers and analysts. Whether or not the United States continues to grant most-favored-nation status to China is less important than whether it has an overall strategy for containing, influencing, and ultimately seeking to change the regime in Beijing. Whether NATO expands this year or five years from now is less important than whether NATO remains strong, active, cohesive, and under decisive American leadership. Whether America builds 20 B-2 bombers or 3 is less important than giving its military planners enough money to make intelligent choices that are driven more by strategic than by budget requirements. But it is clear that a neo-Reaganite foreign policy would have several implications.
The dense budget. Republicans declared victory last year when they added $ 7 billion to President Clintons defense budget. But the hard truth is that Washington now spending about $ 260 billion per year on defense probably needs to spend about $ 60-$ 80 billion more each year in order to preserve Americas role as global hegemon. The United States currently devotes about three percent of its GNP to defense. U.S. defense planners, who must make guesses about a future that is impossible to predict with confidence, are increasingly being forced to place all their chips on one guess or another. They are being asked to predict whether the future is likely to bring more conflicts like the Gulf War or peacekeeping operations like those in Bosnia and Haiti, or more great-power confrontations similar to the Cold War. The best answer to these questions is: who can tell? The odds are that in the coming decades America may face all these kinds of conflict, as well as some that have yet to be imagined.
For the past few years, American military supremacy has been living off a legacy, specifically, the legacy of Ronald Reagan. As former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Colin Powell once noted, it was Reagans military, built in the 198os to deter the Soviet Union, that won the war against Iraq. No serious analyst of American military capabilities today doubts that the defense budget has been cut much too far to meet Americas responsibilities to itself and to world peace. The United States may no longer have the wherewithal to defend against threats to Americas vital interests in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East, much less to extend Americas current global preeminence well into the future.
The current readiness of U.S. forces is in decline, but so is their ability to maintain an advantage in high-technology weapons over the coming decades. In the search for some way to meet extensive strategic requirements with inadequate resources, defense planners have engaged in strategic fratricide. Those who favor current readiness have been pitted against those who favor high-tech research and development those who favor maintaining American forward deployment at bases around the world have been arrayed against those who insist that for the sake of economizing the job be accomplished at long range without bases. The military is forced to choose between army combat divisions and the next generation of bombers, between lift capacities and force projection, between short-range and long-range deterrence. Constructing a military force appropriate to a nations commitments and its resources is never an easy task, and there are always limits that compel difficult choices. But todays limits are far too severe the choices they compel are too dramatic and because military strategy and planning are far from exact sciences, the United States is dangerously cutting its margin for error.
The defense budget crisis is now at hand. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General John Shalikashvili has complained that the weapons procurement budget has been reduced to perilously low levels, and he has understated the problem. Since 1985, the research and development budget has been cut by 57 percent the procurement budget has been cut 71 percent. Both the Clinton administration and the Republican Congress have achieved budget savings over the next few years by pushing necessary procurement decisions into the next century. The Clinton administrations so-called Bottom-Up Review of U.S. defense strategy has been rightly dismissed by Democrats like Senate Armed Services Committee member Joseph Lieberman (D-Conn.) as already inadequate to the present and certainly to the future. Both the General Accounting Office and the Congressional Budget Office have projected a shortfall of $ 50 billion to $ 100 billion over the next five years in funding just for existing force levels and procurement plans.
These shortfalls do not even take into account the development of new weapons, like a missile defense system capable of protecting American territory against missiles launched from rogue states such as North Korea or shielding, say, Los Angeles from nuclear intimidation by the Chinese during the next crisis in the Taiwan Strait. Deployment of such a system could cost more than $ 10 billion a year.
Add together the needed increases in the procurement budget called for by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the justifiable increases in funding for existing forces to make up the shortfalls identified by the GAO and the CBO, and it becomes obvious that an increase in defense spending by $ 60 billion to $ 80 billion is not a radical proposal. It is simply what the United States will require to keep the peace and defend its interests over the coming decades.
If this number sounds like a budget-buster, it should not. Today, defense spending is less than 20 percent of the total federal budget. In 1962, before the Vietnam War, defense spending ran at almost 50 percent of the overall budget. In 1978, before the Carter-Reagan defense buildup, it was about 23 percent. Increases of the size required to pursue a neo-Reaganite foreign policy today would require returning to about that level of defense spending still less than one-quarter of the federal budget.
These days, some critics complain about the fact that the United States spends more on defense than the next six major powers combined. But the enormous disparity between U.S. military strength and that of any potential challenger is a good thing for America and the world. After all, Americas world role is entirely different from that of the other powers. The more Washington is able to make clear that it is futile to compete with American power, either in size of forces or in technological capabilities, the less chance there is that countries like China or Iran will entertain ambitions of upsetting the present world order. And that means the United States will be able to save money in the long run, for it is much cheaper to deter a war than to fight one. Americans should be glad that their defense capabilities are as great as the next six powers combined. Indeed, they may even want to enshrine this disparity in U.S. defense strategy. Great Britain in the late 9th century maintained a two-power standard for its navy, insisting that at all times the British navy should be as large as the next two naval powers combined, whoever they might be. Perhaps the United States should inaugurate such a two- (or three-, or four-) power standard of its own, which would preserve its military supremacy regardless of the near-term global threats.
Citizen involvement. A gap is growing, meanwhile, between Americas professional military, uncomfortable with some of the missions that the new American role requires, and a civilian population increasingly unaware of or indifferent to the importance of its militarys efforts abroad. U.S. military leaders harbor justifiable suspicions that while they serve as a kind of foreign legion, doing the hard work of American-style empire management, American civilians at home, preoccupied with the distribution of tax breaks and government benefits, will not come to their support when the going gets tough. Weak political leadership and a poor job of educating the citizenry to the responsibilities of global hegemony have created an increasingly distinct and alienated military culture. Ask any mechanic or mess boy on an aircraft carrier why he is patrolling the oceans, and he can give a more sophisticated explanation of power projection than 99 percent of American college graduates. It is foolish to imagine that the United States can lead the world effectively while the overwhelming majority of the population neither understands nor is involved, in any real way, with its international mission.
The president and other political leaders can take steps to close the growing separation of civilian and military cultures in our society. They can remind civilians of the sacrifices being made by U.S. forces overseas and explain what those sacrifices are for. A clear statement of Americas global mission can help the public understand why U.S. troops are deployed overseas and can help reassure military leaders of public support in difficult circumstances. It could also lay the groundwork for reasserting more comprehensive civilian control over the military.
There could be further efforts to involve more citizens in military service. Perhaps the United States has reached the point where a return to the draft is not feasible because of the high degree of professionalization of the military services. But there are other ways to lower the barriers between civilian and military life. Expanded forms of reserve service could give many more Americans experience of the military and an appreciation of military virtues. Conservatives preach that citizenship is not only about rights but also about responsibilities. There is no more profound responsibility than the defense of the nation and its principles.
Moral clarity. Finally, American foreign policy should be informed with a clear moral purpose, based on the understanding that its moral goals and its fundamental national interests are almost always in harmony. The United States achieved its present position of strength not by practicing a foreign policy of live and let live, nor by passively waiting for threats to arise, but by actively promoting American principles of governance abroad -- democracy, free markets, respect for liberty. During the Reagan years, the United States pressed for changes in right-wing and left-wing dictatorships alike, among both friends and foes -- in the Philippines, South Korea, Eastern Europe and even the Soviet Union. The purpose was not Wilsonian idealistic whimsy. The policy of putting pressure on authoritarian and totalitarian regimes had practical aims and, in the end, delivered strategic benefits. Support for American principles around the world can be sustained only by the continuing exertion of American influence. Some of that influence comes from the aid provided to friendly regimes that are trying to carry out democratic and free market reforms. However strong the case for reform of foreign aid programs, such programs deserve to be maintained as a useful way of exerting American influence abroad. And sometimes that means not just supporting U.S. friends and gently pressuring other nations but actively pursuing policies in Iran, Cuba, or China, for instance -- ultimately intended to bring about a change of regime. In any case, the United States should not blindly do business with every nation, no matter its regime. Armand Hammerism should not be a tenet of conservative foreign policy.
 
FROM NSC-68 TO 1996
 
THIS SWEEPING, neo-Reaganite foreign policy agenda may seem ambitious for these tepid times. Politicians in both parties will protest that the American people will not support the burdens of such a policy. There are two answers to this criticism.
First, it is already clear that, on the present course, Washington will find it increasingly impossible to fulfill even the less ambitious foreign policies of the realists, including the defense of so-called vital interests in Europe and Asia. Without a broad, sustaining foreign policy vision, the American people will be inclined to withdraw from the world and will lose sight of their abiding interest in vigorous world leadership. Without a sense of mission, they will seek deeper and deeper cuts in the defense and foreign affairs budgets and gradually decimate the tools of U.S. hegemony.
Consider what has happened in only the past few years. Ronald Reagans exceptionalist appeal did not survive the presidency of George Bush, where self-proclaimed pragmatists like James Baker found it easier to justify the Gulf War to the American people in terms of jobs than as a defense of a world order shaped to suit American interests and principles. Then, having discarded the overarching Reaganite vision that had sustained a globally active foreign policy through the last decade of the Cold War, the Bush administration in 1992 saw its own prodigious foreign policy successes swept into the dustbin by Clinton political adviser James Carvilles campaign logic: Its the economy, stupid. By the time conservatives took their seats as the congressional opposition in 1993, they had abandoned not only Reaganism but to some degree foreign policy itself.
Now the common wisdom holds that Doles solid victory over Buchanan in the primaries constituted a triumphant reassertion of conservative internationalism over neoisolationism. But the common wisdom may prove wrong. On the stump during the Republican primaries this year, what little passion and energy there was on foreign policy issues came from Buchanan and his followers. Over the past four years Buchanans fiery America First rhetoric has filled the vacuum among conservatives created by the abandonment of Reagans very different kind of patriotic mission. It is now an open question how long the beleaguered conservative realists will be able to resist the combined assault of Buchanans isolationism of the heart and the Republican budget hawks on Capitol Hill.
History also shows, however, that the American people can be summoned to meet the challenges of global leadership if statesmen make the case loudly, cogently, and persistently. As troubles arise and the need to act becomes clear, those who have laid the foundation for a necessary shift in policy have a chance to lead Americans onto a new course. In 1950, Paul Nitze and other Truman administration officials drafted the famous planning document NSC-68, a call for an all-out effort to meet the Soviet challenge that included a full-scale ideological confrontation and massive increases in defense spending. At first, their proposals languished. President Truman, worried about angering a hostile, budget-conscious Congress and an American public which was enjoying an era of peace and prosperity, for months refused to approve the defense spending proposals. It took the North Korean invasion of South Korea to allow the administration to rally support for the prescriptions of NSC-68. Before the Korean War, American politicians were fighting over whether the defense budget ought to be $ 15 billion or $ 16 billion most believed more defense spending would bankrupt the nation. The next year, the defense budget was over $ 50 billion.
A similar sequence of events unfolded in the 1970s. When Reagan and the Scoop Jackson Democrats began sounding the alarm about the Soviet danger, the American public was not ready to listen. Then came the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the seizure of American hostages in Iran. By the time Jimmy Carter professed to have learned more about the Soviet Union than he had ever known before, Reagan and his fellow conservatives in both parties had laid the intellectual foundation for the military buildup of the 1980s.
 
AN ELEVATED PATRIOTISM
 
IN THEORY, either party could lay the groundwork for a neo-Reaganite foreign policy over the next decade. The Democrats, after all, led the nation to assume its new global responsibilities in the late 1940s and early 1950s under President Truman and Secretary of State Dean Acheson. It is unlikely, however, that they are prepared to pursue such a course today. Republicans may have lost their way in the last few years, but the Democrats are still recovering from their post-Vietnam trauma of two decades ago. President Clinton has proved a better manager of foreign policy than many expected, but he has not been up to the larger task of preparing and inspiring the nation to embrace the role of global leadership. He, too, has tailored his internationalist activism to fit the constraints of a popular mood that White House pollsters believe is disinclined to sacrifice blood and treasure in the name of overseas commitments. His Pentagon officials talk more about exit strategies than about national objectives. His administration has promised global leadership on the cheap, refusing to seek the levels of defense spending needed to meet the broad goals it claims to want to achieve in the world. Even Clintons boldest overseas adventures, in Bosnia and Haiti, have come only after strenuous and prolonged efforts to avoid intervention.
Republicans are surely the genuine heirs to the Reagan tradition. The 1994 election is often said to have represented one last victory for Ronald Reagans domestic agenda. But Reagans earlier successes rested as much on foreign as on domestic policy. Over the long term, victory for American conservatives depends on recapturing the spirit of Reagans foreign policy as well.
Indeed, American conservatism cannot govern by domestic policy alone. In the 1990s conservatives have built their agenda on two pillars of Reaganism: relimiting government to curtail the most intrusive and counterproductive aspects of the modern welfare state, and reversing the widespread collapse of morals and standards in American society. But it is hard to imagine conservatives achieving a lasting political realignment in this country without the third pillar: a coherent set of foreign policy principles that at least bear some resemblance to those propounded by Reagan. The remoralization of America at home ultimately requires the remoralization of American foreign policy. For both follow from Americans belief that the principles of the Declaration of Independence are not merely the choices of a particular culture but are universal, enduring, self-evident truths. That has been, after all, the main point of the conservatives war against a relativistic multiculturalism. For conservatives to preach the importance of upholding the core elements of the Western tradition at home, but to profess indifference to the fate of American principles abroad, is an inconsistency that cannot help but gnaw at the heart of conservatism.
Conservatives these days succumb easily to the charming old metaphor of the United States as a city on a hill. They hark back, as George Kennan did in these pages not long ago, to the admonition of John Quincy Adams that America ought not go abroad in search of monsters to destroy. But why not? The alternative is to leave monsters on the loose, ravaging and pillaging to their hearts content, as Americans stand by and watch. What may have been wise counsel in 1823, when America was a small, isolated power in a world of European giants, is no longer so, when America is the giant. Because America has the capacity to contain or destroy many of the worlds monsters, most of which can be found without much searching, and because the responsibility for the peace and security of the international order rests so heavily on Americas shoulders, a policy of sitting atop a hill and leading by example becomes in practice a policy of cowardice and dishonor.
And more is at stake than honor. Without a broader, more enlightened understanding of Americas interests, conservatism will too easily degenerate into the pinched nationalism of Buchanans America First, where the appeal to narrow stir-interest masks a deeper form of stir-loathing. A true conservatism of the heart ought to emphasize both personal and national responsibility, relish the opportunity for national engagement, embrace the possibility of national greatness, and restore a sense of the heroic, which has been sorely lacking in American foreign policy -- and American conservatism in recent years. George Kennan was right 50 years ago in his famous X article: the American people ought to feel a certain gratitude to a Providence, which by providing [them] with this implacable challenge, has made their entire security as a nation dependent on pulling themselves together and accepting the responsibilities of moral and political leadership that history plainly intended them to bear. This is as true today -- if less obviously so -- as it was at the beginning of the Cold War.
A neo-Reaganite foreign policy would be good for conservatives, good for America, and good for the world. It is worth recalling that the most successful Republican presidents of this century, Theodore Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan, both inspired Americans to assume cheerfully the new international responsibilities that went with increased power and influence. Both celebrated American exceptionalism. Both made Americans proud of their leading role in world affairs. Deprived of the support of an elevated patriotism, bereft of the ability to appeal to national honor, conservatives will ultimately fail in their effort to govern America. And Americans will fail in their responsibility to lead the world.
As the debate over the merits and implications of extending NATO to include Central and Eastern Europe rages on, a critical question has largely been ignored: will Congress and the American people support the initiative? Adding new members requires the unanimous approval of the current allies, and the hurdle for ratification is highest in the United States. The other 15 alliance members need to muster majorities in party-disciplined legislatures, but American consent requires two-thirds of the notoriously independent Senate. With hardly a dissenting voice, the Senate approved membership for Greece and Turkey in 1952, West Germany in 1955, and Spain in 1982, but those votes were cast in the Cold Wars shadow. With that looming menace gone, it is worth leaving aside for the moment the advisability of enlargement and asking simply whether enlargement is possible given the shifting terrain of U.S. domestic politics.
Like many post-Cold War foreign policy initiatives, NATO enlargement has scrambled traditional partisan and ideological blocs. Supporters of enlargement include balance-of-power conservatives apprehensive about rising Russian nationalism and intent on further embedding Germany in Europes security edifice, idealists who seek to bolster democratic and economic reform in Central and Eastern Europe, and NATOphiles who see enlargement as a way to preserve the alliance and its unique military structure. The anti-enlargement faction is equally diverse. It embraces isolationists opposed to further security commitments, internationalists who see enlargement as antagonistic to Russia and unnecessary for the regions political and economic development and security, and hawks who worry that the additional states will weaken the alliances defenses, strain the current members shrinking military resources, and risk leaks of sensitive information.
Even more striking than these motley coalitions are their antithetical predictions for the proposals fate in Congress. Opponents have generally concluded that a new tide of isolationism dooms the idea. European security expert Charles Kupchan writes that U.S. ratification would require a feat of magic given skin-deep political support among a public and Congress that were reluctant to deploy troops in Bosnia or spend tax-payer dollars to rescue the Mexican peso. Meanwhile, enlargements proponents cavalierly disregard the question of ratification, as if compelling arguments alone would produce the required 67 votes. Rather than join forces to battle the proposals opponents, they have trained their fire on each other. Republicans included pro-enlargement provisions in the Contract With America to reprove Clinton for his slow pace on the initiative. When the provisions came to a vote, the administration weighed in against them, on the grounds that they restricted the presidents ability to conduct foreign policy.
Both sides cannot be right. American approval of NATO enlargement cannot be both impossible and inevitable. In fact, while ratification will be difficult, with energetic White House leadership, it is also likely. The enlargement debate ultimately reveals that many observers dangerously overstate the strength of isolationist sentiment and underestimate what kind of foreign policy the United States can sustain after the Cold War.
 
FALSE ANALOGIES
 
Pointing to widespread opposition to the U.S. military interventions in Somalia, Haiti, and Bosnia, critics of enlargement argue that Congress will not extend U.S. security guarantees to the distant Visegrid states -- Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic. But this comparison is specious. Resistance to these missions resulted from policy reversals, the inherently ambiguous objectives of peacekeeping, and above all the fact that the U.S. security interests at stake were either minuscule (Somalia and Haiti) or limited (Bosnia). By contrast, NATO protects a vital American national interest -- the security of all Europe -- and benefits from the memory of its clear, successful Cold War military mission, even if that mission is now changing. Thus, even as Congress objected to U.S. operations in Haiti and Bosnia, it passed pro-enlargement resolutions.
Moreover, enlargement represents a commitment, not a deployment into a hot conflict, and Congress tends to be bolder in sanctioning the former. Veto-proof majorities voted to require the president to lift the Bosnian arms embargo, even though that step might have obligated the United States to send troops to evacuate U.N. forces, whereas the deployment to enforce the Dayton accord garnered only lukewarm support. Extending nuclear and conventional guarantees to the states of Central and Eastern Europe would involve higher risks, but the possibility of hostilities would be far more remote.
Senators will also note that the treatys security pledges are contingent on each states constitutional processes, a caveat the Senate demanded in 1949 to ensure that Congress would have a say before troops were sent into combat. Some may question the value of security guarantees that come so highly conditioned, but NATO has always been plagued by such doubts Truman administration Secretary of State Dean Acheson lamented the weakness of words to bind. Only the course of events can prove whether these new pledges are credible, and such doubts are unlikely to derail ratification.
The issue of American credibility will, in fact, increase support for enlargement. At a January 1994 press conference in Prague, Clinton promised to pursue enlargement, and the longer the prospect of membership sits on the table, the more hesitant Congress will be to yank it away. Stopping the process now would bitterly sappoint states that have anticipated joining the alliance and would send a signal of inconstancy to friends and foes. Pressure on Congress not to renege on Americas commitments led key leaders like Senator John McCain (R-Ariz.) to back the mission in Bosnia despite misgivings, and similar pressures will play an increasingly important role in the enlargement debate.
The cost of enlargement is often cited as another reason it is not politically plausible. To add new members, NATO would need to extend its military infrastructure, upgrade these states military capabilities, and perhaps improve the forces of the current allies to make the security guarantees more meaningful. Critics contend that with both political parties committed to a balanced budget, Congress will balk at paying the U.S. share of these improvements, which will run into the tens of billions of dollars, as one House member has claimed.
But cost is not likely to be as large an obstacle to ratification as critics assume. RAND analysts Ronald Asmus and Richard Kugler recently estimated that the expenses associated with enlargement would amount to between $ 10 billion and $ 50 billion over 10 to 15 years, depending on the force posture adopted. They conclude that the most likely figure is approximately $ 42 billion, with a U.S. slice of about $ 1 billion annually. This is a large sum, but it is less than one-half of one percent of the current U.S. defense budget and only a fraction of the $ 7 billion Congress added to this years Pentagon budget.
Cost concerns may affect implementation of NATO enlargement more than ratification. It is one thing to make commitments and another to pay for them. Shortly after the Senate approved the North Atlantic Treaty, which created NATO, Truman sent Congress a request for $ 1.4 billion in military assistance for the new allies. Senator Arthur Vandenberg (R-Mich.), who had delivered the Republican support for the treaty, suddenly came out against the funding package, and Truman had to modify his request. Today, cost might not derail enlargement, for Congress may choose to acknowledge deficit pressures by reducing the accompanying military assistance.
The higher defense appropriations that NATO enlargement would entail may even become the basis for a broader coalition in favor of ratification. This year congressional hawks coerced Clinton into acceding to their demand for a higher Pentagon budget by making funding for the Bosnian mission contingent on it. In a recent speech endorsing enlargement, House Speaker Newt Gingrich hinted that the G.O.P. might seek a similar exchange in the future: If you are going to think that [enlargement] through, he said, you are not going to cut the defense budget.
 
MISLEADING POLLS
 
Critics of enlargement have also maintained that the American public, scarred by the deaths of U.S. soldiers in Somalia, is unlikely to countenance extending NATO and its security guarantees eastward in the absence of a revived Russian threat. To bolster this argument, they cite survey results, such as a 1994 Chicago Council on Foreign Relations poll which found that 50 percent of respondents from the general public would oppose using U.S. troops to defend Poland were Russia to invade, while just 32 percent would support it.
Yet the polling data, on balance, provide stronger evidence that ratification of NATO enlargement is politically achievable. Both the general public and elites continue to express support for NATO, with only a modest fall off since the end of the Cold War. According to the Chicago Councils poll, 61 percent of the public and 63 percent of opinion leaders favor a sustained or increased commitment to NATO, while only 26 percent of the public and 37 percent of elites call for a decreased commitment to or withdrawal from the alliance. The Chicago Council also asked whether NATO should expand to include Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic 42 percent of the public responded affirmatively, with 32 percent opposed, NATO Enlargements American Hurdle while among elites, the margin was 58 percent to 37 percent. An ABC/Washington Post poll at the beginning of 1994 showed even stronger public support -- a 64 percent to 2percent margin in favor of admitting these three states. Although the latter poll did not inform respondents that membership would obligate the United States to defend these states against attack, the preference for enlargement in both polls is clear.
Such general support for NATO and enlargement reveals more about the prospects for ratification than does the expressed resistance to sending U.S. forces to defend Poland. With the chances that Russia would invade Poland so apparently remote, it is hardly surprising that respondents would not favor using U.S. troops in that case. More important, polls indicate that the public would not favor deploying U.S. forces even in some circumstances in which the United States has long-standing commitments and in which the use of its troops would be almost automatic. For example, the Chicago Council found that the public would, by a margin of 48 percent to 39 percent, oppose dispatching U.S. troops if North Korea attacked South Korea.
In the end, it is wise to discount all these polls. The relationship between public opinion and official action on specific foreign initiatives has always been complex, and with concern over foreign affairs at historic lows, the relationship has often been downright nonlinear. In 1993 Congress voted for major increases in aid to the former Soviet states despite public opposition, and it has slashed the U.S. contribution to the United Nations even though public support for that organization is high (it gets better ratings than NATO or Congress itself). With so little public attention devoted to foreign policy and with the publics knowledge of NATO limited -- throughout the Cold War, between 4o and 5 percent of Americans did not even know Russia was not a NATO member -- elected officials have litde fear of retribution through the ballot. Presidential leadership, the views of foreign policy elites, and the highly motivated voters of Central and East European descent will be the keys to American approval of enlargement.
Critics of enlargement argue, oddly, that this ethnic bloc -- there are almost 10 million Polish-Americans and nearly 20 million Americans with origins in the region -- is both extremely powerful and very weak. They claim the ethnic vote has been influential enough to trigger a bidding war between the administration and congressional Republicans over which is more pro-enlargement, yet they also contend that this bloc, less than six percent of the electorate, is too small to force enlargement through Congress, especially once the cost becomes clear. This analysis shows little understanding of how ethnic groups have historically influenced American foreign policy. If ethnic population figures were all that mattered, the United States would give Africa five times as much aid as Israel.
In fact, Central and East European ethnic voters will have a significant impact on the NATO enlargement debate. The low salience of the issue makes the politics of ratification vulnerable to the sway of ethnic interest groups: the less the general public cares about an issue, the greater the influence of those who care a great deal. Moreover, Central and East European ethnics are concentrated in 14 Midwestern and Northeastern states, which include key battlegrounds this fall and account for 194 electoral votes.
The most important variables affecting an ethnic groups influence on foreign policy are the intensity of its political efforts and the degree to which its goals align with U.S. security interests. The disparity between aid to the Mideast and Africa, after all, derives largely from the passion the Jewish community brings to Israels cause and the different stakes for U.S. security in the two regions. In the case of NATO enlargement, U.S. security interests are extensive Central and Eastern Europe played a key role in triggering both world wars as well as the Cold War. And although many ethnic voters will, no doubt, cast their ballots based on the security of their jobs rather than the security of their homelands borders, major ethnic organizations, such as the Polish American Congress, have devoted great attention to enlargement. On the hustings, both Clinton and Bob Dole, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, can be expected to stress their commitment to extending the alliance eastward.
 
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
 
TYet ratification of NATO enlargement is hardly a foregone conclusion, as many of its advocates assume. The stumbling block will not be Americas allegedly isolationist mood, the favorite scapegoat of frustrated internationalists these days. That mood is a myth. Two-thirds of Americans, the same as during the Cold War, want the United States to play an active role in world affairs. In fact, the greatest political danger to internationalist initiatives comes from fellow internationalists. Some contend that adding new states to NATO in the near term will isolate Moscow, inflame Russian nationalism, unhinge strategic and conventional arms control agreements, create a security vacuum among those states not initially invited into the alliance, and renew Cold War divisions. Only if signs of Russian revanchism become clear should NATO pursue enlargement, they argue, and some urge the transatlantic community to replace NATO with a panEuropean collective security system.
The main proponents of this view in the Senate will be liberal-to-moderate Democrats. In a 1994 Senate vote on provisions offering military supplies to the Visegrad states, 21 Democrats joined one Republican in voting against the amendment. Voicing a sentiment common among enlargement skeptics, internationalist Senator Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) explained his opposition: I am concerned by any attempt to draw unnecessary lines in a newly undivided Europe.
Other internationalists worry that the initiative will drain money from an already underfunded and overextended Pentagon. Some Armed Services Committee members will raise this objection, and tepid support for enlargement among senior military officials would bolster their argument. Senator Sam Nunn (D-Ga.), the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, expressed both types of internationalist concerns last year: By forcing the pace Of NATO enlargement at a volatile and unpredictable moment in Russias history, we could place ourselves in the worst of all security environments: rapidly declining defense budgets, broader responsibilities, and heightened instability.
Such comments hark back to the alliances creation. Despite the lopsided 82-13 Senate vote in favor of ratification of the North Atlantic Treaty, the Truman administration faced opposition from three elements: isolationists, defense hawks, and liberal internationalists. This political triangle shows signs of forming again, possibly more potently than in 1949. In a debate on the Senate floor last October, Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-Tex.), a member of the Armed Services Committee, noted the impact of enlargement on the Pentagon, while Nunn joined moderate Republican Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas and fellow Democrat J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana in raising questions about the plans impact on international relations. Nunn, Kassebaum, Johnston, and Pell will all retire this year, and defense-oriented senators may rally behind ratification if the vote comes to be seen not as a limited policy decision but as a broader referendum on whether the United States should continue to lead NATO or even remain a member. Still, it does not take much speculative math -- perhaps 2o Democrats plus 14 G.O.P. defense hawks or isolationists -- to conclude that the 34 votes needed to kill NATO enlargement are not beyond reach.
Those in the administration and elsewhere who believe the debate is over and ratification assured are fooling themselves. Their inattention to the emerging political environment could give opponents an early and possibly decisive jump the same error nearly defeated the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993. Conversely, those who would blame isolationism for threatening enlargement are pointing a finger in the wrong direction. Although foreign capitals might interpret the rejection of enlargement as a repeat of the 1920s, the decisive negative votes would come not from the descendants of those who sank the League of Nations, but from the heirs of its authors.
 
DANGEROUS STORIES
 
The final hazard for the ratification of enlargement stems from Congress greater assertiveness, partisan fervor, and volatility on foreign affairs issues since the end of the Cold War. More peace on earth has always meant less peace on foreign policy matters down the length of Pennsylvania Avenue, and the 104th Congress has produced post-World War II lows in bipartisanship and congressional support for the White House on key national security votes. The new mood has less to do with isolationism than with oppositionism, since Congress now often calls for more activism when the White House seems hesitant, as when it insisted on an end to the Bosnian arms embargo and a stronger commitment to Taiwans defense.
The atmosphere in Congress is also increasingly volatile. When the Contract With Americas provisions advocating immediate NATO enlargement came before the House in February 1995, second-term Representative John Linder (R-Ga.) supported them. Last December, however, responding to the argument that NATOS credibility depended on a U.S. presence in Bosnia, Linder said, It is time to recognize that NATO expired in August 1989. It is time for us to give it a decent burial, with full military honors. This dramatic reversal on NATO -- from enlargement to interment in just ten months -- should serve as a warning to all who think they can take congressional support for granted. If Clinton is reelected, many Republican supporters may defect from the enlargement effort, citing their concern that it would transform NATO from a shield for collective defense into a peacekeeping morass.
The challenge for a Dole or Clinton administration will be to hold on to as many members from the opposing party as possible. Certainly, many other factors will influence the U.S. politics of NATO enlargement: European views, the progress of reform in Central and Eastern Europe, events in Russia and Bosnia, and the reaction of Ukraine, the Baltic States, and others not likely to be among the first welcomed into the alliance. However, while the admission of new NATO members faces pitfalls, it is politically feasible, especially if the next president embraces it as a personal project and works closely with congressional leaders of both parties. All this does not prove that enlargement is the right policy for the United States we do not choose a path simply because we can. But there is little reason to refrain from pursuing it out of fear that the national mood cannot support it.
That conclusion has implications beyond NATO enlargement. The stories about our national will that we Americans tell ourselves powerfully shape the security policies of the United States and countries around the world. But false stories are dangerous and must be corrected early. By misjudging its political will, the United States narrows its options and undermines its interests. A good foreign policy must begin with the command, Know thyself.
When a fire breaks out in a single-family home, firefighters know what they have to do. Fires in private houses are all pretty much alike. But when a fire breaks out in a warehouse, the firefighters make an effort to find out what is inside before they go to work, lest they do more harm than good. For example, if the warehouse is filled with highly flammable chemicals, dousing the building with water may spread the fire. In the end, the fire department must act regardless, but it is important to act on as much information as one can get about the nature of the problem.
I offer this homily because Ethan B. Kapstein uses an analogy with firefighting to claim that the West, faced with the economic difficulties of inequality and unemployment, has been paralyzed by too much debate over causes (Workers and the World Economy, May/June 1996). He seems to believe that economic crises are like house fires, all pretty much the same. In particular, he seems to believe that the economic woes of advanced nations in the 1990s are basically similar to the problems of the 1930s. Deficit spending was the answer then and it is the answer now. Money should, therefore, be spent like water.
Economic crises, however, are not all the same, and the problems of the 1990s look very little like those of the 1930s. The good news is that while there is considerable dispute about the relative importance of some factors, economists have reached enough of a workable consensus about the nature of the problem to accommodate helpful policies. The bad news is that much, although not all, of what Kapstein has to say ignores this consensus, and that some of his policy recommendations are mischievous. They would either create the risk of renewed inflation and worsen the already shaky finances of Western governments, or they would contribute to the very policy paralysis Kapstein decries.

THE NOT-QUITE CONSENSUS

The economic difficulties of the advanced nations are not new. Unemployment in Europe has been rising steadily since the early 1970s, while inequality in the United States began rising sharply only a few years later. Nor have they failed to receive attention. Over these 20-plus years, hundreds of conferences and thousands of academic articles and official reports have addressed them. While there is not a total consensus -- there never is -- a widely held middle-of-the-road position can be summarized by two propositions.
The first proposition is that the problems of wages and employment are mainly -- forgive the jargon -- structural rather than cyclical. A cyclical economic problem is caused by inadequate demand and can be cured by adopting a more expansionary monetary and fiscal policy -- that is, spending more or taxing less. Structural economic problems cannot be solved in this way. Most economists now believe that the Great Depression was essentially cyclical the slack in employment could have been taken up simply through an aggressive program of demand expansion. But the structural nature of Europes unemployment was graphically demonstrated by the events of the late 1980s. The later stages of a broad business cycle recovery were marked by a noticeable increase in inflation (drastic in the case of the United Kingdom), despite the fact that the unemployment rate was still nearly nine percent. Demand had recovered, but unemployment could not fall below the nine-percent structural rate without triggering inflation.
What is wrong with trading off lower unemployment for slightly higher inflation? Not much, but that is the wrong question, because there is overwhelming evidence that inflation begets inflation. Suppose the Federal Reserve were to push the U.S. unemployment rate down from its current 5.5 percent to 4.5 percent. In the first year the inflation rate would probably rise only from its current 3 percent to 3.5 or 4 percent. But in the next year it would be 4 or 5 percent, the year after that 5 or 6 percent, and ever upward. The point, then, is not that inflation will explode if the unemployment rate is pushed too low. It is that a sustained effort to keep unemployment below the so-called NAIRU -- the non-acceleratinginflation rate of unemployment -- merely by stimulating demand will lead to an upward spiral of inflation. And though high rates of inflation would be slow to materialize, they would be equally hard to get rid of. Once the economy has developed six percent inflation, to get it back down to three percent would require a severe recession. Some countries have substantial room for demand expansion, most notably Japan. For the advanced nations as a whole, however, demand expansion is not a solution indeed, it will only add new problems.
The second and somewhat more controversial proposition of the not-quite consensus is that the growth of international trade is not the main cause of the persistent rise in European unemployment and American inequality. Rather, the main source is a decline in the internal demand for less-skilled labor, probably driven in large part by technological change biased toward highly skilled workers. While Kapstein insists that time should not be wasted debating causes, he nonetheless finds time to pick sides in the dispute here, asserting that as a general explanation, technology is unsatisfactory. It is never clearly distinguished from other kinds of capital, and there is no reason that its introduction must in principle reduce the wages of the unskilled.
In fact, MITS Robert Solow won a Nobel Prize in economics in large part for making it very clear why technological progress and capital accumulation are not at all the same -- and how to measure the difference. Since his work, in literally thousands of empirical studies of economic change, the distinction between technology and capital has played a crucial role. (My own article in the November/December 1994 Foreign Affairs, The Myth of Asias Miracle, was motivated by this very distinction.)
But Kapstein is quite right that technology need not in principle reduce the wages of the unskilled. Whether it does so depends on the bias of the technological change -- whether it is sufficiently biased toward skilled and against unskilled workers. But the claim of many economists that technological change is a major factor in recent wage trends is not based on a priori reasoning it is an empirical proposition, based on facts. Nearly all industries (including those not exposed to international competition) have been increasing the average skill level of their work force by hiring relatively more skilled workers, despite the lower wages of unskilled workers. That indicates that recent technological change has been strongly skill-biased.
The conventional view that international trade is only a secondary source of the growth in unemployment and inequality is also an empirical proposition, and one not arrived at lightly. This is an ongoing debate, driven by technical issues rather than ideology. It is risky for nonspecialists to put their faith in an economist merely because they like the sound of what the economist says. For example, Adrian Woods work, approvingly cited by Kapstein, has been subjected to devastating criticism Woods own numbers do not support his strong claims, and he arrives at large estimates of trades effect only by finessing a basic calculation that indicates the opposite conclusion. n1 
Does the distinction between internal and international causes matter? Yes, it does. Although Kapstein forswears protectionism, it is not at all clear why. After all, if international trade is the main cause of the problem, why not use import restrictions as one line of defense? But if international trade is only 10 or 20 percent of the problem, a protectionist response will bring a whole new set of problems without resolving the ones we already have.

WHAT TO DO

Suppose the middle-of-the-road position on unemployment and inequality is correct: the main source of these problems is a structural, not cyclical, decline in the internal demand for less-skilled labor within advanced countries. One may then conclude that neither a simple policy of overall demand expansion nor one of protectionism against Third World imports is the answer. What, then, can be done?
This is actually not such a hard question. In the United States, which has managed to maintain relatively full employment but has experienced rising inequality, the incomes of low-wage workers need support but that must be done, so far as possible, without raising the cost to employers of hiring those workers. The obvious answer is something like a much bigger version of the earned income tax credit -- an income supplement for workers with low earnings that falls off as a workers earnings rise, but not so rapidly as to negate pay increases and discourage work. Such a program would be subject to some abuse, but so are all government programs.
Europe has nearly the opposite problem. The poor receive relatively generous support, but not enough people are employed. What Europe needs to do is reduce the cost of employing the less skilled, so that the private sector will offer them more jobs. But it must do so without, so far as possible, reducing their incomes. In this case reducing or removing the tax burden associated with hiring low-wage labor, and possibly providing some employment subsidies, are the obvious answers.
The important point -- on which I agree with Kapstein -- is that it should be possible to make a large difference to the incomes of low-wage workers (in the United States) or to their prospects of employment (in Europe) without devastating effects on the budget. In the United States, the crucial thing to remember is just how poor the poor are and how rich the country is. If the United States were willing to devote, say, two percent of GDP to income supplements for the working poor, the effect would be dramatic.
So why hasnt the United States tried this policy? Surely it is not because economists have quarreled over whether trade explains 10 or 30 percent of the increase in wage disparities. A better target for Kapsteins ire might be influential figures who insist that the only way to help the poor in America is to cut taxes on the rich. But Kapstein at least seems to place most of the blame on those with what he regards as a misguided, indeed mystical, concern over budget deficits.

FEAR IS NOT THE ONLY DANGER

Kapstein implies that the economic difficulties of the West are due to its governments obsession with deficit reduction. Let me repeat that the Wests economic problems have been building steadily for more than 20 years, while serious budget-cutting has begun only within the last two or three. The term Eurosclerosis dates not from the 1990s but from the late 1970s European unemployment had already risen to double digits by 1985, when budget difficulties were rarely discussed. The Reagan administration took a remarkably relaxed view of unprecedented peacetime deficits during the 1980s, but that fiscal expansion did not prevent inequality in the United States from soaring.
Nor is concern about deficits the reason Western nations have been unwilling to provide more support for low-wage workers. The sums involved are small enough that if governments and voters were truly persuaded that such policies were necessary, they could quite easily be funded with new taxes or reduced benefits to middle- and upper-income families. Governments and voters are not persuaded, but that has nothing to do with the deficit.
The main reason Kapstein is eager to put aside concern about deficits seems to be that, in spite of all the evidence, he is determined to view the 1990s through the lens of the 1930s. He quotes economist Robert Eisner on the desirability of deficit-induced demand. But with the possible exception of Japan, every advanced country has plenty of room to increase demand simply by cutting interest rates. If they do not do so, it is because their central bankers think an increase in demand is unnecessary or dangerous. They might be wrong, but running budget deficits, which will merely lead those central bankers to impose still higher interest rates, will do nothing to help the situation.
Still, would a more relaxed attitude toward budget deficits do any harm? Here Kapsteins article becomes truly mischievous, by suggesting that concern about deficits is motivated entirely by ideology. Would that it were! Unfortunately, the West is past the point at which the virtues and vices of its budget deficits could be discussed in terms of uncertain macroeconomic effects. The stakes now are much cruder and more elemental: the long-term solvency of Western governments.
Debt as a percentage of national income in almost all Western nations is now comparable to the levels that historically have prevailed only at the end of major wars. But there has been no war, and instead of paying down their debts, as peacetime governments always have in the past, Western treasuries are continuing to increase their debt, for the most part faster than the increases in their tax bases. Moreover, in the current situation there are no major emergencies -- no big arms races or wars in prospect, no natural disasters that require extraordinary spending. But stuff happens. If governments cannot control their budgets when it is not happening, what will they do when it does?
The demographic time bomb makes this situation particularly worrying. The budgets of advanced countries are in large part engines that transfer money from workers to retirees, a system that runs smoothly as long as the population is steadily growing, so that the workingage population is large relative to the retired population. But Western populations have not grown steadily. Baby boom was followed by baby bust, and it is therefore certain that the demands on the social insurance systems of advanced countries will greatly exceed their resources beginning only a bit more than a decade from now. Or to put it differently, to the already huge explicit debts of Western nations one should add implicit debt in the form of their unfunded promises to future retirees. In short, concern about the budget deficits of Western nations can no longer be considered a matter of ideology. These days it is a matter of straightforward accounting, and one must deliberately stick ones head in the sand to imagine otherwise.

PUBLICITY COORDINATION

The aspect of Kapsteins prescriptions I found most puzzling is his insistence that a prerequisite for effective action is coordination of economic policies among the major economies. His suggestion seems to be fairly close to the textbook model for macroeconomic coordination. In that much-beloved classroom exercise, each country would like to expand its domestic demand but fears that such an expansion will worsen its trade balance or lead to a depreciation of its currency. In that case a coordinated expansion offers a way out. Increased imports are matched by increased exports, and flight capital has nowhere to go. It is a perfectly reasonable scenario in principle. It may even be a good model for the economic situation during the 1930s. But does this story about the need for coordinated expansion bear any resemblance to the current situation?
Lets get specific. Which major economies are actually constrained from expansion by concerns about the balance of payments or the reaction of international financial markets? Surely not the United States, which may huff and puff about trade conflicts but whose monetary and fiscal policies treat the trade balance and the exchange rate with benign neglect. Surely not Japan, which is worried about an excessive trade surplus, not a deficit, and which is plagued by a yen that is too strong, not too weak. Japan would actually welcome a bit of capital flight. Surely not Germany with the deutsche mark the key currency of what remains of the European Monetary System, Germany can expect its neighbors to match any reduction it chooses to make in its interest rates. Probably not Britain since it stopped pegging the value of the pound in 1992, Britain has felt free to follow an independent monetary policy. If it has tightened recently, it is not because it fears the reaction of international markets, but because its domestic economy is again showing signs of inflationary pressures.
What we are left with, I guess, is France, which is indeed pursuing a more restrictive monetary policy than it would if it were not concerned about the value of the franc. But the reason for Frances concern is not any inherent need to keep the franc strong -- inflation is almost zero -- but precisely the commitment of the French government to the Maastricht criteria. France, in other words, is the victim of too much international coordination, not too little. So Kapsteins demand for coordinated economic policy seems to arise more from his general sense that such coordination ought to be a good thing than from any consideration of the real economic situation. Still, does it do any harm?
Whatever your assessment of the economic case, there is one overwhelming empirical observation that can be made about macroeconomic policy coordination: it never happens. Well, hardly ever. Whole forests have been leveled to print reports about the Plaza, the Louvre, the Group of Seven, and so on, but it is hard to find a single case in which a major economic player has altered monetary or fiscal policy at the behest of the other major players. One often hears about the G-7 process the reason aficionados like to talk so much about the process is that there have been so few results.
To say, as Kapstein does, that international policy coordination is necessary so that countries can develop expansionary policies within a collective framework, is in effect to say that real action should be postponed for years while countries engage in endless rounds of content-free summatry. Perhaps if there were a compelling case for coordinated policies there might be a way to turn these photo ops into real negotiations (although recent experience in noneconomic affairs is not encouraging), but there is no such compelling case.
None of this should be taken as a counsel of inaction. There is a great deal that can be done to improve the economic situations of the ill-paid and unemployed. However, there is no reason to tie responsible, realistic proposals to raise incomes and create jobs either to irresponsible demands for bigger deficits or to unrealistic expectations about international coordination.
William Kristol and Robert Kagans vision of a Pax Americana helps further the ever unsettled debate over Americas role in the post-Cold War world (Toward a Neo-Reaganite Foreign Policy July/August 1996). But in attempting a conservative policy with a moral clarity, they have offered an approach that is low on strategic clarity, and not very conservative to boot.
Kristol and Kagan are on target when they assert that conservatives need a foreign policy vision to achieve a lasting political realignment no American political movement worth its name can succeed solely on domestic issues. Critics like us are sympathetic to their overriding purpose: to find an inspirational vision to sustain support for American engagement in world affairs.
Unlike some cheap-hawk conservatives, the authors advocate a much higher defense bill to make America a hegemonic power. They rightly worry that deep cuts in the military are putting the United States on the path to decline, and they understand that it is downright silly to propose, as the Clinton administration has, grand strategies of enlarging the worlds democracies and beconing a global peacekeeper without embarking on a military buildup.
THE PERILS OF ESCAPISM
But Kristol and Kagans vision of American foreign policy is without limits or constraints. It is somewhat confusing to discover that the government that runs too much of America runs too little of the world. It is fine with us if leaders use American power and influence: to accomplish traditional foreign policy tasks like deterring aggression, defeating enemy nations, shoring up alliances, and expanding free trade. But we wonder what limits Kristol and Kagan would impose on their global democratic enterprise -- one that ultimately would have the U.S. government engineering the domestic transformation of nations around the globe.
The authors dodge the central foreign policy question facing America in the post-Cold War era: how to develop an internationalist foreign policy disciplined by a framework for selectivity and discrimination. This has been the central question since the Soviet Union collapsed (along with U.S. containment policy) in 1991. Unless it is answered, America will lack a compass in an ever more complex and unpredictable world. This compass should ensure that the United States engages in neither a crusading activism that mindlessly diffuses vital resources nor an isolationism that eschews important opportunities to shape events. Such selectivity, especially in the case of military engagement, has become even more pressing given the precipitous decline in the military capabilities of America and its principal allies. By pretending that America need not be selective in its engagements, Kristol and Kagan are indulging in pure escapism.
The cure-all that is supposed to obviate the need for making choices is spending a lot more money on defense. Kristol and Kagan believe in giving military planners enough money to make intelligent choices. But military planners are not the ones who decide important strategic questions, such as whether to expand NATO, intervene in Bosnia, grant most-favored-nation status to China. or buy 20 or 30 more B-2 bombers the president and Congress are. But how can they make these and other important strategic decisions if, as Kristol and Kagan say, Setting forth the broad outlines of such a foreign policy is more important for the moment than deciding the best way to handle all the individual issues that have preoccupied U.S. policymakers and analysts? What is the point of a strategy if it cannot help a policymaker decide these issues? If it does not meet this most basic test, it is empty rhetoric.
Kristol and Kagan correctly assert that defense cuts have gone too far. But a $ 60 billion to $ 80 billion annual defense spending increase will not be enough to fund their ambitious strategy of Pax Americana. It would cost $ 30 billion more a year just to adequately fund Bill Clintons rather small Bottom-Up Review force. That would allow the United States to fight just one major regional conflict and one minor conflict or large peacekeeping mission, while maintaining a skeletal presence to uphold its European and Asian alliance commitments. Add more money for missile defense systems and a modernization program that takes advantage of the military-technological revolution, and youre back in the hole. There wood be little or no money left over for the arms buildup needed to support Kristol and Kagans strategy of slaying the worlds monsters. In other words, $ 60 billion to $ 80 billion a year or even more would not provide a military so capable that policymakers could avoid hard choices about where power is most needed and most effective.
 
ALL OR NOTHING
Kristol and Kagan offer a false choice to the American people: either America attempts to remake the world in its own image or it once again seeks the dark cave of isolationism from which the Presidents Roosevelt led it. The American people apparently need a foreign policy crusade around which to rally or they will pull up the drawbridge and leave the world to its own devices.
Americans are not as unsophisticated as Kristol and Kagan believe. They understand that global leadership need not be global gendarmerie -- two ends that are easily confused in practice when policymakers build policy around a sense of the heroic. In fact, the American people are rightly suspicious of military missions that are ill defined, open-ended, and unimportant to the national interest. When faced with losing propositions that seem to serve no discernible national interest, such as the military mission in Somalia when it began to fail, the public turns against military interventions. When, on the other hand, the national interest is obvious and the operation well run, as in the Persian Gulf War, the American people overwhelmingly support the sacrifices required by military interventions. Americans need a mission for their foreign policy, not manufactured crusades to fool them into supporting something that they may not understand.
Kristol and Kagan mistake for isolationism the relative indifference of the American public and Congress to foreign affairs. Many conservatives in Congress are not as engaged in foreign policy issues as they should be, but Congress is not the place to look for new ideas and leadership in foreign policy. Those must come from the president, whether a Republican or a Democrat. Americans, indeed, do not care much for foreign policy, so long as things are going well. But as Jimmy Carter found out after the Iranian hostage crisis, they care very much when a president bungles a foreign policy issue or is perceived to be weakening the country.
 
LET REAGAN BE REAGAN
One of the more puzzling aspects of Kristol and Kagans thesis is their narrow interpretation of the Reagan legacy Ronald Reagan certainly deserves much praise for bringing down the curtain the Cold War, and Kristol and Kagan are right to credit him with courage, vision, and will. But they are wrong to take part of his legacy -- the moral crusade against the evil empire and his campaign for democracy -- and blow it up as if it were the whole show. The other side of the coin was the Reagan military buildup, which pressured the Soviet Union into making decisions that were ultimately self-destructive. This was hardheaded realism at its best. It was not some diffuse, open-ended campaign for democracy wherever it was threatened, but a concentrated strategy that mobilized all American resources, moral and military, to eliminate peacefully the threat to, democracy at its source: the Soviet Union and, in effect, communism. Anyone who doubts the hardheadedness of the Reagan administration needs to remember not only the sharp focus of Reagans strategy but the highly discriminating and limiting conditions that Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger imposed on military interventions.
Kristol and Kagan have tried to apply their particular understanding of Reagans legacy to an inappropriate historical situation. Reagan mobilized a successful moral crusade against Soviet communism not only because it was antidemocratic but also because he saw it as a mortal danger to American security. There is today no single antidemocratic movement that possesses the power and ideological challenge of Soviet communism. To be sure, there are plenty of threats to U.S. interests, but they are scattered and come in many different stripes, from Cold War holdover regimes like North Korea to radical Islamic states like Iran. Because the threats they pose are philosophically, geographically, politically, and even militarily diverse, they are not amenable to the kind of single-minded crusade for democracy that Kristol and Kagan propose.
It is a mistake to attempt to apply the heroic aspect of the Reagan legacy to the present. Ronald Reagan did indeed offer a new and comprehensive vision of American strength and leadership in 1980, but it was driven by the twin specters of Soviet expansionism and American weakness. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the communist insurgencies nibbling through Central America combined with Americas demoralized post-Vietnam forces, the humiliation of the hostage crisis, and the debacle of the failed Desert One rescue attempt to help sustain his worldview. Compare the consequences of Reagans legitimately heroic vision -- legitimate because the times demanded it -- with the less than heroic tasks required under Kristol and Kagans conception of America as the worlds policeman: more failing peacekeeping missions in venues like Bosnia, Haiti, and Somalia more American military involvement in bloody civil wars fueled by ancient ethnic and racial hatreds rather than by disagreements over the fine points of democracy and billions more in foreign aid to prop up shaky democratic regimes like those in Russia and Haiti.
Kristol and Kagan seem to imply that anyone proposing limits on the purposes and means of American foreign policy is a defeatist or a declinist a la Paul Kennedy. Worse for conservatives, they seem to say that concern about selectivity and discrimination amounts to apostasy. This is nonsense. Being a conservative is all about pursuing principles in a world constrained by human nature. It is not defeatist to ground strategy in what Walter Lippmann called the controlling principle of American foreign policy: to keep Americas purposes equal to its means and its means equal to its purposes. Far from apostasy, that approach is the logical fulfillment of Reagans vision in the post-Cold War world.
However, the job today is quite different than it was in Reagans time: not to contain or defeat an ideologically hostile superpower, but to prevent rogue states and terrorists from threatening American values and interests in key regions. America could be the worlds policeman, if it wanted to be. It could spend $ 500 billion a year on defense, turn its alliances into vast peacekeeping institutions, put half the developing world on the international dole, and agree to engage in more or less perpetual warfare for decades to come. But why would the United States want to do this? It does not have to do it to protect its interests and values. Americans accept limits on their interventions and interactions with other nations not because they lack confidence or because they are too stingy to pay the price of glory. Rather, they do it because that is all that is required to get the job done.
 
WHOS THE CONSERVATIVE?
This prudent approach is the essence of conservatism. As they have recognized the inherent shortfall in the means of American power, Kagan and Kristols call for a hegemonic crusade does little beyond assuaging their desire for moral clarity. In his book The Vision of the Anointed, Thomas Sowell says that seeking moral clarity within ones own mind, often without concern for unintended consequences, is the fundamentally flawed basis for many liberal social policies. Kristol and Kagan make a similar mistake in foreign policy. It is ironic that Kristol, one of the most eloquent critics of the large administrative state in America, proposes a comparable role in the world for an imperial America. All the elements of an overwhelming government that conservatives deride as counterproductive and morally bankrupt are writ large in this vision of benevolent hegemony. Yet Kagan and Kristol argue that their strategy represents the third pillar of a conservative America that is already dismantling the modern welfare state and reversing the widespread collapse of morals and standards in American society.
William F. Buckley, Jr., following in the footsteps of other venerable conservatives from Edmund Burke to James Madison, has said that the defining element of conservatism is realism -- realism about national sovereignty, human nature, and an international system of competing nation-states. That realism does not have to manifest itself in the guise of an amoral accountant tirelessly calculating quantifiable national interests and constructing cost-benefit tables for American engagement. But conservative realism demands some recognition of the need to engage selectively in efforts that further American values and interests around the globe. Otherwise, one succumbs to a utopian temptation that has bedeviled nonconservatives since the French Revolution.
 
WILL DOLE STAND UP AND SALUTE?
Kristol and Kagans vision is billed as a foreign policy for candidate Bob Dole. Apparently somebody forgot to consult with Dole and his foreign policy team. While Senate majority leader, Dole supported a modest $ 11 billion increase in defense spending over Clintons request for the 1997 fiscal year. Candidate Dole may or may not wish to spend more, but President Dole will not spend $ 60 billion to $ 80 billion more a year on defense. Neither will House Speaker Newt Gingrich or even the most conservative member of the House.
Which raises a question: Who is out of touch here, conservatives in Congress who will not vote for huge defense spending increases, or Kristol and Kagan? The authors of a foreign policy for candidate Dole would like to move the debate toward accepting the need for more defense spending. That is indeed a laudable goal. Unfortunately, their essay may have the opposite effect. It will be easy prey for opponents of a strong national defense, who will now dismiss legitimate calls for more defense spending as part of some new hawkish conservative strategy, when in fact more defense funds are needed just to maintain the United States current strategy. The New York Times has already begun to use this tactic, calling Kristol and Kagans defense plans dangerously aggressive. Demands by conservatives for $ 20 billion or $ 3 billion more merely to fund the Clinton force could be lost in a howl of complaints about how conservatives want to create a vast global empire not for the good Kristol and Kagan intend but to advance some nefarious imperialistic design. Far from clarifying the debate, Kristol and Kagan will have only muddied the waters.
 
WHERES THE DEBATE?
The two are right in their belief that America must lead or be led by others. And they are correct that the United States must maintain a benevolent hegemony of sorts in the world. But it must adopt a strategy of selective engagement that establishes priorities among American interests and clearly adapts means to ends. There is simply no other way to protect American security and values in this age of chaos. Where Kristol and Kagan ultimately fail is in believing that the moral demands of mobilizing public opinion force America to abandon the hard work of selecting and discriminating in foreign policy. This they dismiss as the tawdry labor of beleaguered realists. That is not only false, it is an extremely unwise strategy for conservatives to pursue.
FROM BUILD-DOWN TO STAND-DOWN
MALCOLM MUGGERIDGE once wrote of reaching a moment when he discovered that success was the hallmark of failure. That insight may yet prove to be true for the remarkable achievements in arms control in recent years.
After decades of diplomatic wrangling, breakthroughs have come on many fronts, both bilateral and multilateral. Not only have Soviets and now Russians joined Americans in agreements to make massive reductions in strategic arms, but the overwhelming majority of nations have signed on to indefinite extension of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT). Leaders in Ukraine, Kazakstan, and Belarus have greatly contributed to the nonproliferation regime by returning thousands of Soviet nuclear weapons to Russia for safekeeping and elimination, a process to be completed this fall with the departure of the last few warheads from Belarus.
The Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty has ratified and reinforced the transformation of the military balance on the continent, although the altered political landscape after the collapse of the Soviet empire will require nettlesome changes in its provisions. The long-sought Chemical Weapons Convention should enter into force shortly, and, despite Indias recalcitrance, a comprehensive nuclear test ban enjoys nearly universal support.
Woven through these and other arrangements are unprecedented procedures for strict and effective verification. Particularly in the first and second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties (START I and START II), the United States and Russia are perfecting inspection techniques of far-reaching significance. Similar methods are being applied in the most difficult case of a hostile, uncooperative country, Iraq, where they have yielded crucial lessons for enforcement as well as disturbing revelations of Baghdads habitual deceit. This progress in on-site and remote surveillance is indispensable to sustaining arms control over the long haul.
Yet these heady days in arms control have bred dangerous complacency. Many citizens and their leaders take for granted that arms control deals now require little care and feeding. Some strategists argue, not so sotto voce, that a weakened Russia has no alternative but to continue reducing its forces and that the United States can therefore follow its own strategic preferences with little regard for Moscows desires. This blend of inattention, indifference, and calculation is a recipe for misplaced confidence in a process that remains highly vulnerable to political disruption.
The structure of restraint that recent arms accords have erected is fragile. Reaping its promised benefits will require meticulous implementation over many years. It will also demand an exceptional degree of political sophistication, particularly on the part of American leaders. There are worrisome signs that both Congress and the executive branch may fail the test.
In their understandable determination to cut the budget deficit, members of Congress chopped $ 65 million -- 17 percent -- from the 1996 budget for the prudent and far-sighted program Senators Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and Richard Lugar (R-Ind.) crafted to help Russia manage its complex cutback in nuclear forces. Congress has also been reluctant to fund the Korean Energy Development Organization, the body created to carry out the agreement to head off North Koreas acquisition of nuclear weapons. Many remain skeptical of the latter deals merits, but, as House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) has said, It is possible that it may work. Lacking a better alternative, it behooves the United States to follow through on its part of the bargain, so long as Pyongyang is meeting its commitments to shut down its other nuclear operations. At the same time, the renewed disputes on Capitol Hill over strategic defense and the utility of the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 veer off in ideological directions, hindering cautious assessment of possible tradeoffs appropriate to the post-Cold War strategic situation.
The Clinton administrations shortcomings are of a different kind. The presidents team is well staffed with experienced talent in the field of arms control, and its experts have followed through commendably on the work of their predecessors. That is especially true of their effort to salvage the START agreements and protect the nonproliferation regime by persuading several former Soviet republics to give up their nuclear arsenals.
So consuming has the old agenda been, however, that the administration has done too little to craft a program for the next stage of negotiated restraint. Indeed, the timidity of its early review of the nations nuclear posture opened few avenues for the kind of initiatives likely to be necessary. Many observers see the administrations relatively stand-pat approach to retaining large nuclear deployments as out of kilter with its statements on arms control. It invites the suspicion among foreign governments that for the United States, control arrangements are merely a convenient way of maintaining a perpetual nuclear advantage. That suspicion in turn will probably stall force reductions in Russia and spur proliferation elsewhere.
The next administration, whether headed by President Clinton or former Senator Bob Dole, will face serious tests on these fronts, both in domestic politics and in foreign policy. To preserve the vital gains of recent years, it will need fresh initiatives to renew the momentum of the arms control enterprise. And those initiatives will have to rally bipartisan support. In short, the United States needs a program of action to curb the nuclear menace. Here is one. It would accelerate progress toward a stable strategic environment by adding a more general stand-down of nuclear forces to the gradual build-down now beginning. n1 
LENGTHENING THE FUSE
A NUMBER of present or foreseeable agreements, while by no means guaranteeing an end to violence between their parties, can enhance deterrence by impeding surprise attack and increasing the likelihood that potential victims will have time to bolster their defenses. As a first step to lengthen the fuse on possible nuclear strikes, the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty removed intermediate-range ballistic and ground-launched cruise missiles from the superpower inventories in Europe. While submarine-launched ballistic missiles remain central to mutual deterrence, the United States and Russia have undertaken to remove nuclear weapons from their surface fleets (much to the satisfaction of naval officers, who considered such weapons unlikely to be usable and a waste of precious storage space for conventional weapons). Tactical nuclear weapons have been withdrawn from forward deployment in Central Europe, with NATO retaining only a modest number of air-deliverable theater nuclear weapons to balance residual capabilities in Russia. NATO has modified its doctrine to underscore the concept that nuclear weapons are strictly weapons of last resort -- not a no-first-use pledge, but definitely a different emphasis from the previous approach.
The first stages of reductions under START I have seen the removal of thousands of warheads from Russian and American strategic forces, and if the START II pact finally comes into force, both sides will be moving toward levels of total deployed warheads in the 3,000 to 3,500 range. But that process, scheduled to run into the next century, is so protracted that it weakens the political impact on other states weighing their own nuclear prospects.
In the meantime Moscow and Washington have assured each other that they have detargeted their missiles -- that is, stopped aiming them at each other -- and have lowered the alert status of their strategic forces, signaling that neither plans an attack. Those changes are sensible and welcome, but they are too easily reversed to have more than symbolic value. Far more is required in bilateral accords to realize the potential for strengthening stability in the military balance and the behavior of states. To offer maximum reassurance that they are turning away from reliance on nuclear options and to demonstrate dramatically their commitment to nonproliferation, the United States and Russia should take nuclear warheads off delivery vehicles and store them under mutual surveillance to prevent their covert return to active service.
Moving nuclear weapons into this kind of strategic escrow would have profound advantages, not least that it can be accomplished more promptly than the slow-motion tasks of elimination planned under the START agreements. It would in fact represent a phased approach to the START reductions, but one that gains in the short term most of the benefits sought from full implementation of the treaties. As an example of leadership in the nonproliferation campaign both countries regard as vital to their security, it would be a step of unprecedented boldness.
Coupled with that boldness, however, would be an essential degree of reversibility. Storing the warheads and locking the door would not mean their immediate elimination. If strategic relations deteriorated and a return to active nuclear deployments seemed necessary, the United States and Russia could still bring the weapons out of storage. They could do so, however, only with the foreknowledge of the other party, which could compensate with its own redeployment.
Needless to say, applying the escrow principle to all U.S. and Russian strategic forces would require early participation in similar arrangements by Britain, China, and France, the other nuclear powers. Indeed, the current START agreements, if implemented, carry the two major powers to force levels at which further progress would depend on engaging those governments. With strategic deployments ranging from fewer than 300 warheads (China) to slightly more than 500 (France), those countries should find an intermediate escrow stage more acceptable than a requirement that they destroy portions of their more meager forces. Though slower than the timetable India demands for the nuclear haves to give up their arsenals, escrow would maximize incentives for New Delhi to modify its hostility to a test ban and accept restraints on the covert nuclear programs in India, Pakistan, and Israel.
Escrow is a hedging scheme, designed to eliminate the hair-trigger postures of strategic forces while affording states confidence that they have not irrevocably sacrificed their ability in extremis to go nuclear within a reasonably short time. It does not meet the demands of those insisting on abolition of nuclear weapons, but it is compatible with whatever reduction and destruction of nuclear weapons future circumstances warrant and diplomacy can produce. n2 
Another feature of the escrow concept deserves highlighting. At present the most worrisome aspect of warhead reductions is the difficulty of handling and protecting the nuclear materials that warheads contain. Once fissile components are removed from weapons, safeguarding them becomes even more of a challenge. The large quantities of such materials in non-weapon form in Russia and the United States are more likely to leak into the wrong hands, more difficult to track, and potentially easier to divert than fissile elements left in warheads. It makes no sense to increase the risks by adding fissile material removed from weapons to material already more susceptible to diversion.
This simple technical fact gains significance in view of the bureaucratic relations within and between the Russian and American governments. Bluntly stated, there is more reason to be confident in the ability of the Russian military to safeguard these materials than in that of the nuclear enthusiasts at Russias Ministry of Atomic Energy. MINATOMs top officials have demonstrated a disturbing proclivity to promote the use of nuclear technology even at the risk of increased proliferation, as in their insistent campaign to complete nuclear reactor deals with Iran and their rather resentful response to suggestions for improved safeguards at their own facilities. Cooperation between American and Russian military professionals has come a long way. For some years hence it could well be wise to encourage the Russian military to retain custody of the nuclear materials now in warheads. The straightforward way to do that is to leave the materials in the weapons and subject those weapons to the strictest possible scrutiny. Strategic escrow is a practical means of preventing dispersal of the raw materials of nuclear weapons into less trustworthy hands.

PLAYING REAGANS OTHER CARD
RONALD REAGANS passionate plea for technological breakthroughs to provide an effective strategic defense against ballistic missiles is well known and still controversial. Usually overlooked, however, is the other element in his approach: a ban on ballistic missiles. Reagan proposed such a prohibition to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev at Reykjavik in 1985, picking up ideas from Undersecretary of Defense Fred Ikle and START negotiator Max Kampelman. (In a 1973 Foreign Affairs article, Ikle had depicted the distinctive threat ballistic missiles pose to stability, terming them doomsday catapults.)
At the time, few strategists thought Reagans notion of a missile ban feasible. But with the fundamental shifts in world politics since then, it has become both more practical and more desirable. Indeed, as worries flare regarding proliferation to rogue states, a global ban on long-range ballistic missiles seems increasingly attractive, even urgent. From a national security standpoint, it is more important that other states not acquire such weapons than that their present owners retain them. Rendering these lethal weapons even more dangerous is that they strike so swiftly that they deny leaders any opportunity for the deliberate decisions and diplomatic maneuvers on which stable peace depends.
In terms of technical feasibility and reliability, a prohibition on the testing, production, and deployment of ballistic missiles is incomparably simpler than an active defense against them. Moreover, as the world made progress toward such a ban, the burdens on a strategic defense would diminish markedly, since any defensive deployments would only have to serve as a hedge against violation of the ban. The extraordinary advances Russians and Americans have made in on-site inspection and monitoring of missile capabilities open the door for a comprehensive approach to banning these uniquely destabilizing instruments of warfare. What was implausible in an era of strategic confrontation could work in the era of systematic, verifiable cooperation that is now unfolding.
Together with observation satellites and other national surveillance technologies, implementation of START I and the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty has already tried and proved most of the operating procedures required for enforcement of a global ban on ballistic missiles. No state could hide for long the testing and production facilities needed to field a substantial force of long-range missiles. Left untested, and with meaningful training for launch crews impossible, present inventories of shorter-range missiles scattered across several troublesome regions should gradually become inoperable or unreliable.
If the advantages of a missile ban are evident, so are the obstacles in its way. The least serious of these is the need to isolate missile capabilities from the space-launch activities that states will certainly wish to continue. With careful, transparent management of the design, testing, production, and operations of space-launch vehicles, containing the danger of clandestine missile deployments would pose no insuperable difficulties. The graver challenges to establishment of an effective missile prohibition are not technical, but strategic and political.
Foremost among them is the question of whether the Russians would be amenable to the plan. Although many Russian analysts favor cutting strategic forces to quite low levels -- a few hundred warheads is a range commonly suggested -- some influential advocates contend that Moscow must retain a sizable number of missiles since it cannot afford to shift its deterrent posture to more costly, slow-flying systems (aircraft and cruise missiles) available to the United States. That makes sense in the current protracted transition away from the massive deployments the superpowers fielded.
In the context of an agreement on strategic escrow, however, phasing in a ban on ballistic missiles would have very different implications for Russian as well as American security. It would offer immediate payoffs in crisis stability, and liberate resources for additional aircraft (and air defenses, if deemed worthwhile). The idea has added appeal when Russia looks ahead to the shift from multiple-warhead to single-warhead land-based missiles scheduled to occur under the START II accord. That commitment points toward a drastic, albeit mutually advantageous, shift away from the giant strategic rockets in which Russia has invested far more heavily than the United States.
While American missile strategists, like their Russian counterparts, will probably have mixed feelings about that shift, there are reasons to expect important changes in their attitude as the presently planned reductions proceed. The U.S. Air Force is headed toward a small number of single-warhead intercontinental ballistic missiles based in silos, and is bound to give priority to its traditional missions based on airplanes and other airborne systems. As for the Army, nothing would do more to strengthen its capacity to defend its forces on the ground than a constraint on missiles capable of long-range strikes, since such a constraint would shrink potential attacks to shorter-range and slower missiles against which defenses could be concentrated.
In the Navys case, giving up sea-launched ballistic missiles, the pillars of stable deterrence, would be wrenching, but doing so would not require abandoning its favorite strategic platforms. In the Persian Gulf War, submarines performed outstandingly as cruise-missile launchers, and they could remain in service for the purpose. In that capacity they would be valuable complements to the so-called arsenal ships the navy is now exploring as advanced technology systems for launching hundreds of cruise missiles or other weapons. All these considerations suggest that trends the build-down has already set in motion could lead the armed services to support a ballistic missile ban.
No one can know in advance how successful a campaign by Americans and Russians to establish a global prohibition on long-range ballistic missiles would be, since regional factors drive a number of states to acquire such weapons. Yet the impetus toward restraint imparted by the two powers commitment to move in this direction would surely be powerful. It would exemplify both their recognition that these systems are more dangerous than useful and their readiness to forgo presumed strategic advantages over states not in a position to compete in the most advanced of these technologies.

PREVENTIVE ACTION
CONCERN OVER acquisition of long-range missile capabilities by the rogue regimes of North Korea, Iraq, Iran, and Libya fuels much of the congressional interest in rapid erection of strategic defenses. Intelligence estimates rate the possibility of intercontinental missile threats from those quarters as slender and long-term. Yet threats of such uncertain nature and timing oblige policymakers to consider all options, including the provocative possibility of preemptive strikes against incipient missile development programs. Such preventive action would become both more workable and more legitimate once Americans and Russians agreed to a cooperative approach on banning ballistic missiles.
There are precedents for preemptive action against would-be proliferators. The United States demonstrated its readiness to strike directly at Libya when President Reagan ordered a military response for the 1986 terrorist attack on Americans at a Berlin discotheque. More recently, Secretary of Defense William Perry publicly declared that the United States would not allow Libya to complete work on a suspected chemical weapons facility. The United States has mounted cruise missile attacks on Iraq for terrorist activities and for actions against its Kurdish minority. Both Senator John McCain (R-Ariz.) and President Bushs national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, have intimated that a North Korean refusal to abandon its nuclear program would warrant preemptive attacks. Israel actually mounted such an attack with its 1981 strike on Iraqs Osirak reactor. These episodes call to mind Soviet overtures in the 1960s sounding out U.S. attitudes toward a possible preemptive attack on Chinas embryonic nuclear capabilities.
In February 1995 the U.N. Security Council underscored the paramount importance of halting the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, describing it as a threat to international peace and security -- language that connotes a situation warranting a military response. The New York Times has urged a ban on acquisition of ballistic missiles (as well as weapons of mass destruction) and, if necessary, coercive action to eliminate the production capability and destroy any stocks produced or bought. A latent, surprisingly broad consensus may now exist that supports preemption against the most reckless renegades.
This is not to suggest that a policy of preemption against emerging ballistic missile capabilities would win ready acceptance, although technically it would be far easier to execute with conventional weapons than strikes against more concealable nuclear activities. The precedents indicate that in dire circumstances there will be intense political pressure to destroy complexes for testing and production of long-range missiles well before they can function. It would make a great deal of difference whether such an attack was an attempt to preserve a privileged position for states possessing such weapons or a means of enforcing a program aimed at eliminating the weapons worldwide. Unlike the situation during the era of all-out strategic competition, a cooperative program to segregate nuclear weapons from delivery systems and to ban ballistic missiles could create a more tolerant environment for preemption against violators.
One must compare the preemptive option with strategic defenses pursued unilaterally. Active defenses may eventually be necessary, but they could have consequences, not so much for outlaw states over the long term as for the partners on whom nuclear and missile restraints depend in the short term. Installing anti-missile defenses could spur an increasingly prosperous China, for example, to increase its long-range missile deployments from a few score to several hundred. Is it worth building thin defenses against an indeterminate threat of a few missiles in North Korea in the distant future at the price of provoking a much more substantial deployment by China in the short term? Preemption to enforce a missile ban against would-be proliferators has its attractions, particularly if it can be endorsed multilaterally. It is not an option to be recommended or adopted lightly, especially when one assesses possible countermeasures by a government with the huge conventional forces at Pyongyangs disposal. But lesser dangers have provoked such actions in the past. In the setting of an international campaign to abolish ballistic missiles, preemption would become more justifiable.

ANOTHER START
THE PROPOSALS outlined here may at first glance appear too ambitious, too hard to execute for American and Russian governments already struggling to digest a full plate of arms control agreements. In crucial respects, however, combining an escrow plan for nuclear weapons with a movement to ban long-range ballistic missiles could help cut the Gordian knot in which nuclear diplomacy is now entangled. Changing operational deployments in these ways would take time, but far less than current projections for force dismantlement. Offloading warheads and placing them in secure storage would be simpler, faster, and cheaper than destroying them, and safer than feeding their nuclear components into channels less reliable than those the military provides. Banning ballistic missiles is not a one-size-fits-all panacea, but the concept is strategically wise and technically feasible and could be politically critical to building a global regime of restraint for such destabilizing technologies.
The place to introduce these novel concepts is the next round of strategic negotiations between Moscow and Washington. The United States has been reticent on the subject of such discussions, which has aroused a suspicion among Russian strategists that Washington may be content to pause at START II levels. That suspicion in turn has led some of those strategists, as well as Russian politicians, to argue that ratification of START II could have serious disadvantages for Russia. Among others, the agreements ban on multiple-warhead ICBMs imposes on the Russians expensive investments for reconfiguring their forces with single-warhead missiles.
With such concerns in mind, analysts in Moscow have stressed the need to set force levels below the 3,000 to 3,500 warheads permitted under START II, partly because it will be hard for Russia to afford a force posture of that scale. To some American observers, that fact is a temptation difficult to resist. Why not exploit Russias current economic hardships by demurring on further negotiations in the expectation that the United States will be able to maintain START II force levels while Russia has to trim its deployments well below the authorized limits? That inclination is old-think, rooted in the competitive attitudes that sought unilateral advantage rather than the preference for mutual benefits that has guided the START endeavor. It is a disposition that simultaneously makes a return to counterproductive strategic antagonism more likely and makes collaboration to stem the most pernicious strategic threat to both countries -- nuclear and missile proliferation -- less likely.
If, as many who have studied the matter closely believe, it is possible to design more stable strategic postures at much lower levels than START II calls for, there is no sufficient reason to postpone further discussion. A willingness to begin START III talks now would help smooth the way for the Russian Duma to ratify START II, as the U.S. Senate has already done. Since more far-reaching START arrangements hinge on approval of those previously negotiated, preliminary discussions could start now without conditions or commitments and on the explicit understanding that actual agreement must await Russian ratification of the pending treaty.
Since additional major reductions raise novel problems, including the need to extend controls to British, French, and Chinese strategic forces, they require thorough preparation. But START III negotiations would also permit exploration of the concepts and rationales described here. The resulting ideas would challenge the parties to look beyond the conventional, linear approach to reductions, however valuable it may be, to more imaginative innovations that can accelerate progress toward the fundamental goal of a stable, reliable strategic relationship.
International pressure is mounting for more decisive measures to deal with weapons of mass destruction. Against the urgings of the United States, Britain, and a few other countries, on July 8 the International Court of Justice responded, nearly unanimously, to a request by the U.N. General Assembly for an advisory opinion on the legality of nuclear weapons. On the merits, the judges split evenly, with seven of fourteen concluding that the threat or use of nuclear weapons would generally be contrary to law (although they did not offer a definitive opinion on whether the extreme case of a threat to a states survival might permit an exception). Significantly, judges from Russia and China, as well as ones from Germany, Italy, and Hungary, were among those ruling that the threat to use such weapons would be unlawful in most circumstances. The court was unanimous in concluding that states possessing nuclear weapons are legally obligated to pursue and conclude negotiations in good faith leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control.
The thrust toward abolition of nuclear weapons is likely to gain momentum this fall with the so-called Canberra Commissions report to the United Nations. The commissions discussions have clearly run in that direction and will carry added weight because of the participation of retired U.S. Air Force General George Lee Butler, the former commander in chief of the U.S. Strategic Command. The sentiment is widespread that last years indefinite extension of the NPT obliges the nuclear powers to phase out their existing arsenals of such weapons. These political trends reinforce the strategic arguments for initiatives that will ease countries away from the persistent risks of current nuclear and ballistic missile force postures.
In politics, strategy, and technology, trends rarely move in phase. More often than not they advance out of step with each other, interacting disjointedly, with lag times and repercussions that impose strains on governments and societies. It is the task of statecraft to harmonize their movement, so far as possible, and otherwise manage the disruptions they generate. The extraordinary successes of strategic diplomacy in the Reagan-Gorbachev and the Bush-Yeltsin-Clinton years represent statecraft of a high order. They make it possible to consider still more remarkable departures. And without bolder innovations, the achievements so far recorded will remain in jeopardy.
An enormously powerful trend is now reshaping nations, cultures, economies and financial markets. It is the aging of the worlds population -- a truly glacial force that is already straining national budgets throughout the industrialized world. Over the next generation, global graying will force major reform in public pension and retirement systems everywhere to adapt to an unprecedented era of rising longevity.
Consider just a few striking facts. Life expectancy on a global basis has risen from just over 46 years in the early 1950s to 63 years by the late 1980s. It is headed for a bit more than 72 years by the early 2020s. This means that within the lifetime of a typical Baby Boomer -- 1950 through the 2020s -- the average human lifespan will have risen by more than 50%.
A triumph of modern medicine and hygiene, the trend toward longer lifespans has already scored dramatic gains in the most developed nations -- and still has room to go. Life expectancy in the United Kingdom today is 78 years for men and 82 years for women -- and rising. By comparison, over a century ago, British men were expected to live to age 44 and British women to age 47. Similar trends apply across the OECD countries, with developing nations catching up fast.
By 2030, the World Bank estimates that fully 16% of the worlds population will be age 60 or older -- well over 1 billion people -- the majority of whom will average 25 years or more in retirement, some nearly half their lives. Most of this growth among the earths elderly population will take place in Asia -- with 25% of the increase occurring in China alone. In developed countries, the age pyramid will be even more top-heavy, with over-60s rising from 19% of OECD populations today to roughly 30% by 2030.
To put this trend in perspective, consider that at the turn of the century, the portion of the population in Western Europe and North America that could expect to live to the age of 65 was less than one percent.
Today, as societies seek to adapt to this profound historic shift, the most obvious impact is the increasingly serious strains that pension costs put on national budgets.
Todays public pension systems are the descendants of a wave of Social Insurance reform that began with Otto Von Bismarcks Germany in the 1880s and spread to dozens of nations before inspiring Franklin Roosevelts New Deal and its centerpiece, Social Security, in Depression-era America.
Originally designed as minimal social safety nets and often intended to co-opt the appeal of socialist politics for workers, these pension plans achieved great success in alleviating the ancient scourge of poverty among the elderly -- an achievement that no civilized society should want to abandon.
The plans were structured as pay-as-you-go systems -- funded, that is, by taxes on current workers rather than from the earnings of true investment pools. In the Bismarck-to-Roosevelt era, public pension plans were grounded in several key assumptions then-valid for most nations that adopted them: short life spans, large families, steadily growing populations and workforces -- augmented in some cases by heavy immigration -- and dynamic, fast-growing economies.
Retirement benefits were originally meager -- and late. In 1935, for example, when Social Securitys founders pegged age 65 as the retirement age, average life expectancy was 61. Moreover, there were dozens of active workers per retiree, and Americas workforce and economy were both growing more rapidly than the number of elderly Americans.
In fact, continued high support ratios of workers to retirees, growing workforces and rapid national growth enabled many national pension schemes to function reasonably well into the 1970s and early 1980s -- even as politicians in many countries tacked on additional benefits, raised taxes to sustain the flows and turned a blind eye to the beginning of tidal shifts in demographics.
Today, those shifts are eroding the basic assumptions of pay-as-you-go retirement systems all over the world. Lifespans are rising. More people are retiring early. Family size is shrinking, as is the willingness of many to directly support their elderly parents and relatives. Workforces are growing more slowly -- if at all. And political pressures are rising in most developed nations to curb, not encourage, immigration.
The results are striking. In the U.S. for example, the support ratio has fallen from 16 workers per retiree in the 1950s to little more than 3 to 1 today. By the year 2030, there will be only 2 workers to support each pensioner in the United States Japan, perhaps the worlds most rapidly aging nation, now has a birthrate of 1.5 children per family -- well below replacement rate -- and will see its workforce begin to contract sharply within a decade.
Given that in any pay-as-you-go system, the support ratio of workers to retirees is the ultimate basis of a populations future retirement security -- governments and societies all over the world are clearly drifting toward what can legitimately be called a global pension finance crisis -- with mounting risks to their national budgets, economies, capital markets and even social cohesion.
In many nations, the weight of carrying traditional pay-as-you-go public pensions is already pressing up against the need to spend on education, research, transportation -- even defense. In the United States, for example, absent reform, the arc of current entitlement spending -- on Social Security and Medicare alone -- could rise to displace most other government spending by early in the next century, turning the federal government, as one critic puts it, into little more than an ATM machine for transfer payments.
While outlays stress budgets, the tax burden of funding public pension systems also exerts a heavy drag on many nations economic growth -- and especially on their ability to create jobs. OECD nations today spend an average of 9% of their total economic output on pensions -- in many cases more -- and the aging of the post-World War II Baby Boom generation will dramatically raise those outlays and tax burdens to sustain them. Sustaining Germanys generous retirement benefits, for example, could require payroll taxes of over 30% -- for pensions alone -- by 2020.
Without major reforms -- soon -- the financial pressures eroding pay-as-you-go state pension plans will grow steadily more severe. And the longer reform is delayed, the more wrenching the ultimate adjustments will have to be.
Fortunately, several elements vital to making reform possible are emerging. A change in public opinion about pensions and investments, the example of some successful pension system reforms in Chile, Australia and other nations and the emergence of truly global investment and securities markets all suggest ways out from under the seemingly inexorable forces of demography.
Like global aging itself, financial liberalization and the growth of global securities markets is a trend with impressive momentum. In less than a generation, more than two billion people have entered into free or semi-free economies -- opening global horizons for trade and investment -- and spurring a remarkable surge in securities markets worldwide.
By the measurement of the World Banks International Finance Corporation, just 56 nations had significant stock markets a decade ago -- with total capitalization of $ 6.5 trillion. By 1995, more than 85 nations had equity markets worth measuring. Their total capitalization: nearly $ 18 trillion. Global bond market capitalization has also surged: to more than $ 18.5 trillion.
For the first time ever, securities markets large enough to absorb substantial shares of the annual tax inflows to public pension plans have emerged. For many nations, large, liquid securities markets now make it possible to contemplate engaging private investment options to supplement -- and strengthen -- national pension plans and to sustain their goal of a dignified retirement for all.
At a minimum, the higher long-term returns historically delivered by equity markets should suggest to policymakers that allowing investment of some public pension tax revenues could greatly reduce the politically painful pension benefit cuts or tax increases that will otherwise soon be upon them.
Indeed, we believe, that it is possible to craft reforms in public pension systems that will safeguard retirement security for the elderly, enable the young and middle-aged to keep more of the fruits of their labor and achieve those first two goals not only without over-burdening national economies -- but while actually enhancing their long-term prospects.
How can we achieve such a miracle? The most credible way, arguably, is by allowing workers to invest some of their pension plan contributions and tap the higher returns that private markets, especially equity markets, can offer. In the United States, for example, the stock market has been delivering returns of roughly 10% a year compounded for decades running -- right through wars, the Great Depression, the oil shocks of the 1970s and the Black Tuesday crash of 1987.
In other nations, the growth of large, liquid, properly regulated stock and bond markets is rapidly making investment in these markets a genuine alternative for retirement finance. And with cross-border investment outflows from OECD nations now over $ 700 billion a year, according to the Bank for International Settlements figures, a truly global investment market has emerged that all nations can access.
Debate and discussion about how best to engage private investment options in reforming public pensions is now gathering momentum in Europe, Asia and in the United States -- where the debate has been opened by a forthcoming report from the Clinton Administrations Advisory Council on Social Security.
The Councils 13 members emerged with three different proposals to address Social Securitys long-term finances -- two groups favoring different levels of individual private investment options, one group supporting a vast, government-administered equity fund.
More striking than their differences, however, is the fact that this expert panel unanimously agreed that tapping such private investment options as stocks, bonds, CDs and other vehicles is the only way to secure the higher returns needed to keep Social Securitys promise.
The mere fact that such options are now being openly discussed in the United States marks a sea change in the political climate. Until recently, Social Security reform was simply too risky an issue for most politicians to discuss. Now, a host of public opinion polls confirm deep skepticism about the programs future -- rising to solid majorities of doubt among the young -- and a growing desire to be allowed to invest some Social Security revenues in real, individually owned retirement accounts.
Of course, that does not mean that reform will be easy -- or politically painless. Major recent protests over cuts in retirement, health and social benefits in Germany and France underline the lingering political sensitivity of any entitlement reform.
As a 1994 World Bank report, Averting the Old-Age Crisis, rightly warned, government-backed pensions have proved both unsustainable and very difficult to reform. But with public opinion changing and the inexorable arithmetic of demography in motion -- the risks of not reforming may be even greater.
In fact, there is considerable reason to believe that permitting personal investment of some retirement system taxes would actually prove popular and increase confidence among voters and pensioners.
Well-designed reforms could reduce the exposure of governments and financial markets to the threat of systemic fiscal crisis. More, reform could offer major economic and social benefits -- higher global savings, more generous, truly secure retirement incomes and an increase in secular economic growth rates.
Economist Martin Feldstein, for one, argues that for the United States, at least, moving from a pay-as-you-go model to a private, fully-funded pension system would increase the nations capital stock and productivity by the equivalent of a permanent 2% per year gain in GDP. Even if Feldsteins estimates are generous -- or beyond the bounds of political likelihood -- they do indicate the growth bonus that private investment options can credibly claim to provide.
For many developing nations in particular, engaging private investment options in pension system reform may also be a way to jump-start the growth of larger, more sophisticated national capital markets (including those for government debt). As it was in Chile, investment of workers pension funds in the early years of reform may well be limited to domestic stocks and bonds.
Politicians in developed nations, by contrast, may find the greatest appeal of private investment options as the best, if not the only, way to defuse a political time bomb.
Viewed in that light, the coming global retirement crisis presents policymakers everywhere not only with a daunting fiscal challenge, but also with an historic opportunity: to harness the energy of todays truly global capitalism to keep the promise of a dignified retirement for future generations.
This is a long-overdue debate -- one that we all should welcome.
Continuing the Inquiry: The Council on Foreign Relations from 1921 to 1996. BY PETER GROSE. New York: Council on Foreign Relations Press, 1996, 82 pp. $ 12.95 (paper).
This sprightly work tells the story of the Council on Foreign Relations, established in the aftermath of the First World War and now in its 75th year. Peter Grose, a managing editor and executive editor of Foreign Affairs from 1984 to 1993, locates the origins of the council in the Inquiry that Woodrow Wilsons envoy, Colonel House, with the journalist Walter Lippmanns aid, established for the benefit of the American peace delegation at Versailles. What had prompted the Inquiry in the first place -- the absence within the State Department of the detailed knowledge of European conditions that would be required for redrawing, as fairly as could be done, the map of the world -- led some Inquiry members, together with a select group of English citizens, to concur on the need for an organization that would continue the inquiry after the war. The plan for a joint Anglo-American enterprise miscarried, as both sides developed sober second thoughts and there was a moment, on the American side, when physical exhaustion and spiritual depletion made the whole venture seem dauntingly problematic. But the project was revived, and the scholars -- badly in need of money, as always -- joined forces with a parallel undertaking of financiers and international lawyers. The council incorporated itself on July 29, 1921, with the first issue of its flagship journal, Foreign Affairs, rolling off the presses in September 1922.Its mission was not only to inform but also to guide American public opinion.
 
QUIZZICAL INTERNATIONALISM
The need for information -- nay, for guidance -- was pressing. American domestic opinion was returning, with a vengeance, to the insular habits that had long characterized it. If the idea for the council had been conceived in the most cosmopolitan of firmaments, the new child saw its first light under a different sign. The Philadelphia Records comment of 1928 -- The American people dont give a hoot in a rainbarrel who controls north China -- was expressive of that insularity. Against the attitude of smug indifference to the external world the council has always stood. But its internationalism was, at the same time, hesitant and quizzical, unsure of the answers but convinced that the questions needed a full airing. Its first president, Elihu Root, had played a critical role in formulating the Republican reservations to American membership in the League of Nations, reservations that proved unacceptable to Woodrow Wilson and doomed American participation. Between an unreconstructed Wilsonianism and a blind insularity, some new way would have to be found.
The heyday of the councils influence came with the Second World War and the United States assumption of world leadership and responsibility. The council represented the establishment when there was an establishment to represent it embodied the consensus when the consensus seemed sturdy and immovable. The council always enjoyed a semiofficial status, close to the government but distinct from it its members worried about giving the sanction of its authority to anything suggestive of the lunatic fringe. But in the early days, no less than in the heydays, the activities of the council -- the study groups, Foreign Affairs and other publications, the confidential discussions among the luminaries after dinner, cigars, and brandy -- reflected a genuine receptiveness to the lure of ideas. Despite his reservations, the first editor of Foreign Affairs, Archibald Cary Coolidge, published Worlds of Color by W. E. B. Du Bois in 1925 four more contributions from Du Bois appeared under Coolidges successor, the formidable Hamilton Fish Armstrong. Within the confines marked out by decorum, gravitas, and the search for the vital center, the challenge to received ideas was encouraged, even relished.
 
THE CONSENSUS FRACTURES
Vietnam destroyed the foreign policy consensus and fractured the establishment the divisions it prompted were as deep and bitter within the council as in the larger society. In recovering from that trauma, the council faced a domestic scene very different from what it had known. Its status had changed, suddenly and palpably: it was no longer at the center of things. Its relationship with Washington was now often distant, the attitude of presidents sometimes resentful, sometimes (worst of all) indifferent. Competitors to Foreign Affairs arose, almost as good as the original, a veritable hairsbreadth away in general excellence, as often as not supplying the best essay of the season. While Foreign Affairs maintained and then increased its dominance in circulation, it was now one voice among many. Indeed, it was itself many voices its pages were opened to a spectrum of opinion as wide as that of any of its competitors, for it no longer had a consensus to represent, only a set of questions to investigate. The councils membership rolls swelled, as it accommodated the newly recognized diversities of gender, ethnicity, and region. And though many of its officers, fellows, and members continued to await the call to government service, and some of them still got it, the status the council had once enjoyed was not, and could not be, recovered.
 
REFLECTIONS ON PURPOSE
Anniversaries are moments not only for celebration but also for reflection. Grose has provided a fond recital of past accomplishments, recalled long-forgotten quarrels, and sketched a handsome outline of institutional history. If the brevity of his account is such as to pique, rather than satisfy, the curiosity of the historian, one must acknowledge that the occasion would have been ill served by a lengthy tome. What Grose does capture is the spirit of the undertaking: the sense of its founders, as well as its renovators, that America has a continuing need to be drawn out of its parochialisms. The insularity of the public attitude is not the only parochialism at issue that afflicting the academic world, though it has different manifestations, is equally alarming. In drawing scholars from their narrow specializations, and businessmen, lawyers, and financiers to a broader perspective, the council has performed a vital public service. The partnership improved all its partners, while also enlightening public opinion and providing fruitful warnings and breadth of vision to governments.
Grose does not speculate about the future, but his characterization of the past provides ample material for reflection on its possibilities and hazards. At 75 years, the council approaches the term of human life it is surely not immune to the forces that decree decay and the erosion of vitality on all living things. In the autumn of its influence, it must compete for attention in a world that values instant opinion and startling images its leaders, like those of virtually all other intermediate associations in this society, must devote enormous efforts to fundraising, with the subtle deflections from purpose that often entails. It must grow in order to accommodate itself to a changing and diverse society, but risks losing through growth the qualities that made it distinctive. Its best sense of itself has always lain in the application of wide-ranging intelligence to the pressing international problems of the age, informed by the humble recognition that the public good is best discovered through scrupulous analysis and open debate. If these qualities are lost, all will be lost if retained, the centennial of 2021 should provide good cause for renewed celebration. And good cause as well for reintroducing the cigars and the brandy.
